
A PEOPLE’S HISTORY OF THE WORLD
CHRIS HARMAN
A PEOPLE’S HISTORY OF THE WORLD
First Published by Bookmarks 1999
Copyright © Bookmarks Publication Ltd 1999, 2002
This edition published by Verso 2008
Copyright © Verso 2008
All rights reserved
The moral right of the author has been asserted
Verso
UK: 6 Meard Street, London W1F 0EG
USA: 180 Varick Street, New York, NK 10014-4606
www.versobooks.com
Verso is the imprint of New Left Books
ISBN: 978-1-84467-468-8
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Contents
Introduction
Part one: The rise of class societies
Prologue: Before class
Chapter 1 The neolithic ‘revolution’
Chapter 2 The first civilisations
Chapter 3 The first class divisions
Chapter 4 Women’s oppression
Chapter 5 The first ‘Dark Ages’
Part two: The ancient world
Chapter 1 Iron and empires
Chapter 2 Ancient India
Chapter 3 The first Chinese empires
Chapter 4 The Greek city states
Chapter 5 Rome’s rise and fall
Chapter 6 The rise of Christianity
Part three: The ‘Middle Ages’
Chapter 1 The centuries of chaos
Chapter 2 China: the rebirth of the empire
Chapter 3 Byzantium: the living fossil
Chapter 4 The Islamic revolutions
Chapter 5 The African civilisations
Chapter 6 European feudalism
Part four: The great transformation
Chapter 1 The conquest of the New Spain
Chapter 2 Renaissance to Reformation
Chapter 3 The birth pangs of a new order
Chapter 4 The last flowering of Asia’s empires
Part five: The spread of the new order
Chapter 1 A time of social peace
Chapter 2 From superstition to science
Chapter 3 The Enlightenment
Chapter 4 Slavery and wage slavery
Chapter 5 Slavery and racism
Chapter 6 The economics of ‘free labour’
Part six: The world turned upside down
Chapter 1 American prologue
Chapter 2 The French Revolution
Chapter 3 Jacobinism outside France
Chapter 4 The retreat of reason
Chapter 5 The industrial revolution
Chapter 6 The birth of Marxism
Chapter 7 1848
Chapter 8 The American Civil War
Chapter 9 The conquest of the East
Chapter 10 The Japanese exception
Chapter 11 Storming heaven: The Paris Commune
Part seven: The century of hope and horror
Chapter 1 The world of capital
Chapter 2 World war and world revolution
Chapter 3 Europe in turmoil
Chapter 4 Revolt in the colonial world
Chapter 5 The ‘Golden Twenties’
Chapter 6 The great slump
Chapter 7 Strangled hope: 1934-36
Chapter 8 Midnight in the century
Chapter 9 The Cold War
Chapter 10 The new world disorder
Conclusion: Illusion of the epoch
Notes
Glossary
Further Reading
Chris Harman is the editor of International Socialism journal
(www.isj.org.uk) and a leading member of the Socialist Workers Party in
Britain. He is the author of many articles, pamphlets and books including
The Fire Last Time: 1968 and After, Explaining the Crisis, Economics of
the Madhouse, How Marxism Works, The Lost Revolution: Germany
1918 to 1923 and Revolution in the 21st Century.
Introduction
Who built Thebes of the seven gates?
In the books you will find the names of kings.
Did the kings haul up the lumps of rock?
And Babylon, many times demolished
Who raised it up so many times? In what houses
Of gold-glittering Lima did the builders live?
Where, the evening that the Wall of China was finished
Did the masons go? Great Rome
Is full of triumphal arches. Who erected them? Over whom
Did the Caesars triumph? Had Byzantium, much praised in song
Only palaces for its inhabitants? Even in fabled Atlantis
The night the ocean engulfed it
The drowning still bawled for their slaves.
The young Alexander conquered India.
Was he alone?
Caesar beat the Gauls.
Did he not have even a cook with him?
Philip of Spain wept when his armada
Went down. Was he the only one to weep?
Frederick the Second won the Seven Years War. Who
Else won it?
Every page a victory.
Who cooked the feast for the victors?
Every ten years a great man.
Who paid the bill?
So many reports.
So many questions.
‘Questions from a Worker who Reads’ by Bertolt Brecht
The questions raised in Brecht’s poem are crying out for answers. Providing
them should be the task of history. It should not be regarded as the preserve of
a small group of specialists, or a luxury for those who can afford it. History is
not ‘bunk’, as claimed by Henry Ford, pioneer of mass motor car production,
bitter enemy of trade unionism and early admirer of Adolf Hitler.
History is about the sequence of events that led to the lives we lead today.
It is the story of how we came to be ourselves. Understanding it is the key to
finding out if and how we can further change the world in which we live. ‘He
who controls the past controls the future,’ is one of the slogans of the
totalitarians who control the state in George Orwell’s novel 1984. It is a
slogan always taken seriously by those living in the palaces and eating the
banquets described in Brecht’s ‘Questions’.
Some 22 centuries ago a Chinese emperor decreed the death penalty for
those who ‘used the past to criticise the present’. The Aztecs attempted to
destroy records of previous states when they conquered the Valley of Mexico
in the 15th century, and the Spanish attempted to destroy all Aztec records
when they in turn conquered the region in the 1520s.
Things have not been all that different in the last century. Challenging the
official historians of Stalin or Hitler meant prison, exile or death. Only 30
years ago Spanish historians were not allowed to delve into the bombing of the
Basque city of Guernica, or Hungarian historians to investigate the events of
1956. More recently, friends of mine in Greece faced trial for challenging the
state’s version of how it annexed much of Macedonia before the First World
War.
Overt state repression may seem relatively unusual in Western industrial
countries. But subtler methods of control are ever-present. As I write, a New
Labour government is insisting schools must stress British history and British
achievements, and that pupils must learn the name and dates of great Britons. In
higher education, the historians most in accord with establishment opinions are
still the ones who receive honours, while those who challenge such opinions
are kept out of key university positions. ‘Compromise, compromise’, remains
‘the way for you to rise.’
Since the time of the first Pharaohs (5,000 years ago) rulers have presented
history as being a list of ‘achievements’ by themselves and their forebears.
Such ‘Great Men’ are supposed to have built cities and monuments, to have
brought prosperity, to have been responsible for great works or military
victories—and, conversely, ‘Evil Men’ are supposed to be responsible for
everything bad in the world. The first works of history were lists of monarchs
and dynasties known as ‘King Lists’. Learning similar lists remained a major
part of history as taught in the schools of Britain 40 years ago. New Labour—
and the Tory opposition—seem intent on reimposing it.
For this version of history, knowledge consists simply in being able to
memorise such lists, in the fashion of the ‘Memory Man’ or the Mastermind
contestant. It is a Trivial Pursuits version of history that provides no help in
understanding either the past or the present.
There is another way of looking at history, in conscious opposition to the
‘Great Man’ approach. It takes particular events and tells their story,
sometimes from the point of view of the ordinary participants. This can
fascinate people. There are large audiences for television programmes—even
whole channels—which make use of such material. School students presented
with it show an interest rare with the old ‘kings, dates and events’ method.
But such ‘history from below’ can miss out something of great importance,
the interconnection of events.
Simply empathising with the people involved in one event cannot, by itself,
bring you to understand the wider forces that shaped their lives, and still shape
ours. You cannot, for instance, understand the rise of Christianity without
understanding the rise and fall of the Roman Empire. You cannot understand the
flowering of art during the Renaissance without understanding the great crises
of European feudalism and the advance of civilisation on continents outside
Europe. You cannot understand the workers’ movements of the 19th century
without understanding the industrial revolution. And you cannot begin to grasp
how humanity arrived at its present condition without understanding the
interrelation of these and many other events.
The aim of this book is to try to provide such an overview.
I do not pretend to provide a complete account of human history. Missing
are many personages and many events which are essential to a detailed history
of any period. But you do not need to know about every detail of humanity’s
past to understand the general pattern that has led to the present.
It was Karl Marx who provided an insight into this general pattern. He
pointed out that human beings have only been able to survive on this planet
through cooperative effort to make a livelihood, and that every new way of
making such a livelihood has necessitated changes in their wider relationships
with each other. Changes in what he called ‘the forces of production’ are
associated with changes in ‘the relations of production’, and these eventually
transform the wider relationships in society as a whole.
Such changes do not, however, occur in a mechanical way. At each point
human beings make choices whether to proceed along one path or another, and
fight out these choices in great social conflicts. Beyond a certain point in
history, how people make their choices is connected to their class position.
The slave is likely to make a different choice to the slave-owner, the feudal
artisan to the feudal lord. The great struggles over the future of humanity have
involved an element of class struggle. The sequence of these great struggles
provides the skeleton round which the rest of history grows.
This approach does not deny the role of individuals or the ideas they
propagate. What it does do is insist that the individual or idea can only play a
certain role because of the preceding material development of society, of the
way people make their livelihoods, and of the structure of classes and states.
The skeleton is not the same as the living body. But without the skeleton the
body would have no solidity and could not survive. Understanding the material
‘basis’ of history is an essential, but not sufficient, precondition for
understanding everything else.
This book, then, attempts to provide an introductory outline to world
history, and no more than that. But it is an outline which, I hope, will help some
people come to terms with both the past and the present.
In writing it, I have been aware throughout that I have to face up to two
prejudices.
One is the idea that the key features of successive societies and human
history have been a result of an ‘unchanging’ human nature. It is a prejudice that
pervades academic writing, mainstream journalism and popular culture alike.
Human beings, we are told, have always been greedy, competitive and
aggressive, and that explains horrors like war, exploitation, slavery and the
oppression of women. This ‘caveman’ image is meant to explain the
bloodletting on the Western Front in one world war and the Holocaust in the
other. I argue very differently. ‘Human nature’ as we know it today is a product
of our history, not its cause. Our history has involved the moulding of different
human natures, each displacing the one that went before through great
economic, political and ideological battles.
The second prejudice, much promulgated in the last decade, is that
although human society may have changed in the past, it will do so no more.
An adviser to the US State Department, Francis Fukuyama, received
international acclaim when he spelt out this message in 1990. We were
witnessing no less than ‘the end of history’, he declared in an article that was
reproduced in scores of languages in newspapers right across the world. Great
social conflicts and great ideological struggles were a thing of the past—and a
thousand newspaper editors and television presenters agreed.
Anthony Giddens, director of the London School of Economics and court
sociologist to Britain’s New Labour prime minister, repeated the same
message in 1998 in his much hyped but little read book, The Third Way. We
live in a world, he wrote, ‘where there are no alternatives to capitalism.’ He
was accepting and repeating a widespread assumption. It is an unsustainable
assumption.
Capitalism as a way of organising the whole production of a country is
barely three or four centuries old. As a way of organising the whole production
of the world, it is at most 150 years old. Industrial capitalism, with its huge
conurbations, widespread literacy and universal dependence on markets, has
only taken off in vast tracts of the globe in the last 50 years. Yet humans of one
sort or another have been on the earth for over a million years, and modern
humans for over 100,000 years. It would be remarkable indeed if a way of
running things that has existed for less than 0.5 percent of our species’ lifespan
were to endure for the rest of it—unless that lifespan is going to be very short
indeed. All the writings of Fukuyama and Giddens do is confirm that Karl
Marx was right about at least one thing, in noting that ‘for the bourgeoisie there
has been history and is no more’.
The recent past of our species had not been some smooth upward path of
progress. It has been marked by repeated convulsions, horrific wars, bloody
civil wars, violent revolutions and counter-revolutions. Times when it seemed
that the lot of the mass of humanity was bound to improve have almost
invariably given way to decades or even centuries of mass impoverishment
and terrible devastation.
It is true that through all these horrors there were important advances in the
ability of humans to control and manipulate the forces of nature. We have a
vastly greater capacity to do so today than a thousand years ago. We live in a
world in which natural forces should no longer be able to make people starve
or freeze to death, in which diseases which once terrified people should have
been abolished for ever.
But this in itself has not done away with the periodic devastation of
hundred of millions of lives through hunger, malnutrition and war. The record
of the 20th century shows that. It was the century in which industrial capitalism
finally took over the whole world, so that even the most remote peasant or
herder now depends to some degree on the market. It was also a century of
war, butchery, deprivation and barbarity to match any in the past, so much so
that the liberal philosopher Isaiah Berlin described it as ‘the most terrible
century in Western history’. There was nothing in the last decades of the
century to suggest things had magically improved for humanity as a whole.
They saw the wholesale impoverishment of the former Eastern bloc, repeated
famines and seemingly endless civil wars in different parts of Africa, nearly
half Latin America’s people living below the poverty line, an eight year war
between Iran and Iraq, and military onslaughts by coalitions of the world’s
most powerful states against Iraq and Serbia.
History has not ended, and the need to understand its main features is a
great as ever. I have written this book in the hope that it will aid some people
in this understanding.
In doing so, I have necessarily relied on the efforts of numerous previous
works. The section on the rise of class society, for instance, would have been
impossible without the writings of the great Australian archaeologist V Gordon
Childe, whose own book What Happened in History bears reading over and
over again, even if it is dated in certain important details. Similarly, the section
on the medieval world owes a big debt to the classic work of Marc Bloc and
the output of the French Annales school of historians, the sections on the early
20th century to the works of Leon Trotsky, and on the later 20th century to the
analyses of Tony Cliff. Readers with some knowledge of the material will
notice a host of other influences, some quoted directly and mentioned in the
text or the end notes, others no less important for not receiving explicit
acknowledgement. Names like Christopher Hill, Geoffrey de Ste Croix, Guy
Bois, Albert Soboul, Edward Thompson, James McPherson and D D Kosambi
spring to mind. I hope my book will encourage people to read their work. For
readers who want to follow up particular periods, I include a brief list of
further reading at the end of the book.
Dates are not the be-all and end-all of history, but the sequence of events is
sometimes very important—and sometimes difficult for readers (and even
writers!) to keep track of. For this reason, there is a brief chronology of the
major events in a particular period at the beginning of each section. For a
similar reason, I include at the end of the book glossaries of names, places and
unfamiliar terms. These are not comprehensive, but aim to help readers of any
one section to make sense of references to people, events and geographical
locations dealt with more fully in others. Finally, I owe thanks to many people
who have assisted me in turning a raw manuscript into a finished book—to Ian
Birchall, Chris Bambery, Alex Callinicos, Charlie Hore, Charlie Kimber,
Lindsey German, Talat Ahmed, Hassan Mahamdallie, Seth Harman, Paul
McGarr, Mike Haynes, Tithi Bhattacharya, Barry Pavier, John Molyneux, John
Rees, Kevin Ovenden and Sam Ashman for reading all or parts of the
manuscript, noticing numerous inaccuracies and sometimes forcing me to
reassess what I had written. None of them, needless to say, are responsible
either for the historical judgements I make at various places, nor for any factual
errors that remain. I owe special thanks to Ian Taylor for editing the
manuscript, and to Rob Hoveman for overseeing the production of the final
book.
Part one
The rise of class societies
Chronology
4 million years ago
First apes to walk on two legs—Australopithecus.
1.5 million to 0.5 million years ago
Clearly human species, Homo erectus, tools of stone, wood and bone. Early
‘old Stone Age’.
400,000 to 30,000 years ago
Neanderthal humans in Europe and Middle East—signs of culture and
probable use of language.
150,000 years ago
First ‘modern humans’ (Homo sapiens sapiens), probably originated in Africa.
Live by foraging (in small nomadic groups without classes, states or sexual
oppression). Middle ‘old Stone Age’.
80,000 to 14,000 years ago
Modern humans arrive Middle East (80,000 years ago); cross to Australia
(40,000 years ago); arrive Europe (30,000 years ago); establish Americas
(14,000 years ago). Late ‘old Stone Age’.
13,000 years ago
Climate allows some humans to settle in villages a couple of hundred strong
while continuing to live by foraging. ‘Middle Stone Age’ (‘Mesolithic’).
10,000 years ago
First agricultural revolution. Domestication of plants and animals. Neolithic
(‘new Stone Age’). More advanced tools, use of pottery. Spread of village-
living. First systematic war between groups. Still no division into classes or
states.
7,000 years ago
Plough begins to be used in Eurasia and Africa. Agriculture reaches NW
Europe. ‘Chieftainships’ among some groups, but no classes or states.
6,000 to 5,000 years ago
‘Urban revolution’ in river valleys of Middle East and Nile Valley, some use
of copper.
5,000 years ago (3000 BC)
States emerge in Mesopotamia and ‘Old Kingdom’ Egypt. First alphabets,
bronze discovered, clear division into social classes, religious hierarchies and
temples. First pyramids in about 2,800 BC. ‘Bronze Age’. Tendency for
women to be seen as inferior to men.
4,500 to 4,000 years ago (2500 to 2000 BC)
Growth of city states in Indus Valley. Sargon establishes first empire to unite
Middle East. Building of stone rings in western Europe. Probably Nubian
civilisation south of Egypt.
4,000 years ago (around 2000 BC)
‘Dark Age’—collapse of Mesopotamian Empire and of Egyptian ‘Old
Kingdom’. Iron smelted in Asia Minor.
4,000 to 3,600 years ago (2000 to 1600 BC)
Rise of ‘Minoan’ civilisation in Crete. Revival of Egypt with ‘Middle
Kingdom’ and of Mesopotamian Empire under Hammurabi. Urban revolution
takes off in northern China. Mycenaean civilisation in Greece.
3,600 years ago (1600 BC)
Crisis in Egypt with collapse of ‘Middle Kingdom’ into ‘second intermediate
period’. ‘Dark Age’ with collapse of Cretan, Indus and then Mycenaean,
civilisations. Disappearance of literacy in these areas. ‘Bronze Age’ in
northern China with Shang Empire.
3,000 years ago (1000 BC)
Uxum civilisation in Ethiopia. Growth of Phoenician city states around
Mediterranean. ‘Urban revolution’ in ‘Meso-America’ with Olmec culture and
in Andean region with Chavin.
2,800 to 2,500 years ago (800 to 500 BC)
New civilisations arise in India, Greece and Italy. Meroe in Nubia.
2,500 to 2,000 years ago (400 to 1 BC)
Olmec civilisation of Meso-America invents its own form of writing.
2,000 years ago (1st century AD)
Rise of Teotihuacan in Valley of Mexico—probably biggest city in world—
despite having no use of hard metals. Deserted after about 400 years.
Followed by rise of civilisations of Monte Alban and of Mayas in southern
Mexico and Guatemala.
Prologue
Before class
The world as we enter the 21st century is one of greed, of gross inequalities
between rich and poor, of racist and national chauvinist prejudice, of
barbarous practices and horrific wars. It is very easy to believe that this is
what things have always been like and that, therefore, they can be no different.
Such a message is put across by innumerable writers and philosophers,
politicians and sociologists, journalists and psychologists. They portray
hierarchy, deference, greed and brutality as ‘natural’ features of human
behaviour. Indeed, there are some who would see these as a feature throughout
the animal kingdom, a ‘sociobiological’ imperative imposed by the alleged
‘laws’ of genetics.1 There are innumerable popular, supposedly ‘scientific’
paperbacks which propagate such a view—with talk of humans as ‘the naked
ape’ (Desmond Morris),2 the ‘killer imperative’ (Robert Ardrey),3 and, in a
more sophisticated form, as programmed by the ‘selfish gene’ (Richard
Dawkins).4
Yet such Flintstones caricatures of human behaviour are simply not borne
out by what we now know about the lives our ancestors lived in the
innumerable generations before recorded history. A cumulation of scientific
evidence shows that their societies were not characterised by competition,
inequality and oppression. These things are, rather, the product of history, and
of rather recent history. The evidence comes from archaeological findings
about patterns of human behaviour worldwide until only about 5,000 years
ago, and from anthropological studies of societies in different parts of the
world which remained organised along similar lines until the 19th and earlier
part of the 20th century. The anthropologist Richard Lee has summarised the
findings:
Before the rise of the state and the entrenchment of social inequality, people
lived for millennia in small-scale kin-based social groups, in which the core
institutions of economic life included collective or common ownership of land
and resources, generalised reciprocity in the distribution of food, and
relatively egalitarian political relations.5
In other words, people shared with and helped each other, with no rulers
and no ruled, no rich and no poor. Lee echoes the phrase used by Frederick
Engels in the 1880s to describe this state of affairs, ‘primitive communism’.
The point is of enormous importance. Our species (modern humans, or Homo
sapiens sapiens) is over 100,000 years old. For 95 percent of this time it has
not been characterised at all by many of the forms of behaviour ascribed to
‘human nature’ today. There is nothing built into our biology that makes present
day societies the way they are. Our predicament as we face a new millennium
cannot be blamed on it.
The origins of our species go much further back into the mists of time than
100,000 years. Our distant ancestors evolved out of a species of ape which
lived some four or five million years ago in parts of Africa. For some unknown
reason members of this species gave up living in trees, as do our closest
animal relatives, the common chimpanzee and the bonobo (often called the
‘pygmy chimpanzee’), and took to walking upright. They were able to survive
in their new terrain by cooperating more than any other species of mammal,
working together to make rudimentary tools (as chimps sometimes do) to dig
up roots, reach high berries, gather grubs and insects, kill small animals and
frighten off predators. The premium was on cooperation with each other, not
competition against one another. Those who could not learn to adopt such
forms of cooperative labour, and the new patterns of mental behaviour that
went with them, died out. Those who could survived and reproduced.
Over millions of years this resulted in the evolution of a mammal whose
genetic inheritance was very different to that of other mammals. It lacked the
highly specialised physical features which enable other mammals to defend
themselves (large teeth or claws), to keep warm (thick fur) or to flee (long
legs). Instead, early humans were genetically programmed for extreme
flexibility in response to the world around them—by being able to use their
hands to hold and shape objects, being able to use their voices to communicate
with each other, being able to investigate, study and generalise about the world
around them, and being able, through long years of child rearing, to pass on
their skills and learning. All this required the growth of large brains and the
ability and desire to socialise. It also led to the development of a means of
communicating with each other (language) qualitatively different to that of any
other animals, and with it the ability to conceptualise about things which were
not immediately present—that is, to become conscious of the world around
them and of themselves as beings within it.6 The emergence of modern humans,
probably in Africa some 150,000 years ago, was the culmination of this
process.7
Over the next 90,000 years groups of our ancestors slowly spread out from
Africa to establish themselves in other parts of the globe, displacing other
human species like the Neanderthals in the process.8 By at least 60,000 years
ago they had reached the Middle East. By 40,000 years ago they had made
their way to western Europe and also somehow managed to cross the band of
sea separating the islands of south east Asia from Australia. By 12,000 years
ago, at the latest, they had crossed the frozen Bering Straits to reach the
Americas, and were scattered across every continent except Antarctica. The
small groups which established themselves in each location were often almost
completely isolated from each other for many thousands of years (melting ice
made the Bering Straits impassable and raised the sea level to make the
passage from south east Asia to Australia difficult). Their languages grew to
be very different and each accumulated its own set of knowledge and
developed distinctive forms of social organisation and culture. Certain minor
hereditary characteristics became more marked among some than others (eye
colour, hairiness, skin pigmentation and so on). But the genetic inheritance of
the different groups remained extremely similar. Variations within each group
were always greater than variations between them. All of them were equally
capable of learning each other’s language, and all had the same spread of
intellectual aptitudes. The human species was separated into widely dispersed
groupings. But it remained a single species. How each grouping developed
depended not on anything specific about its genetic make up, but on how it
adapted its manipulative skills and forms of cooperation to the needs of making
a livelihood in its particular environment. It was the form taken by this
adaption which underlay the different societies which emerged, each with its
own distinct customs, attitudes, myths and rituals.
The different societies shared certain common, fundamental features until
about 10,000 years ago. This was because they all obtained their food, shelter
and clothing in roughly the same way, through ‘foraging’—that is, through
getting hold of natural produce (fruit and nuts, roots, wild animals, fish and
shellfish) and processing them for use. These societies were all what are
normally called ‘hunting and gathering’—or, better, ‘foraging’—societies.9
Many survived in wide regions of the world until only a few hundred years
ago, and the remnants of a few still exist at the time of writing. It has been by
studying these that anthropologists such as Richard Lee have been able draw
conclusions about what life was like for the whole of our species for at least
90 percent of its history.
The reality was very different to the traditional Western image of such
people as uncultured ‘savages’,10 living hard and miserable lives in ‘a state of
nature’, with a bitter and bloody struggle to wrest a livelihood matched by a
‘war of all against all’, which made life ‘nasty, brutish and short’.11
People lived in loose-knit groups of 30 or 40 which might periodically get
together with other groups in bigger gatherings of up to 200. But life in such
‘band societies’ was certainly no harder than for many millions of people
living in more ‘civilised’ agricultural or industrial societies. One eminent
anthropologist has even called them ‘the original affluent society’.12
There were no rulers, bosses or class divisions in these societies. As
Turnbull wrote of the Mbuti pygmies of Congo, ‘There were no chiefs, no
formal councils. In each aspect of…life there might be one or two men or
women who were more prominent than others, but usually for good practical
reasons…The maintenance of law was a cooperative affair’.13 People
cooperated with each other to procure the means of livelihood without either
bowing before a great leader or engaging in endless strife with each other.
Ernestine Friedl reported from her studies, ‘Men and women alike are free to
decide how they will spend each day: whether to go hunting or gathering, and
with whom’.14 Eleanor Leacock told of her findings: ‘There was no…private
land ownership and no specialisation of labour beyond that of sex…People
made decisions about the activities for which they were responsible.
Consensus was reached within whatever group would be carrying out a
collective activity’.15 Behaviour was characterised by generosity rather than
selfishness, and individuals helped each other, offering food they had obtained
to other band members before taking it themselves. Lee comments, ‘Food is
never consumed alone by a family: it is always shared out among members of a
living group or band…This principle of generalised reciprocity has been
reported of hunter-gatherers in every continent and in every kind of
environment’.16 He further reports that the group he studied, the !Kung17 people
of the Kalahari (the so called ‘Bushmen’), ‘are a fiercely egalitarian people,
and they have evolved a series of important cultural practices to maintain this
equality, first by cutting down to size the arrogant and boastful, and second by
helping those down on their luck to get back in the game’.18 An early Jesuit
missionary noted of another hunter-gathering people, the Montagnais of
Canada, ‘The two tyrants who provide hell and torture for many of our
Europeans do not reign in their great forests—I mean ambition and avarice…
not one of them has given himself to the devil to acquire wealth’.19
There was very little in the way of warfare, as Friedl notes:
Contests for territory between the men of neighbouring foraging groups are not
unknown…But on the whole, the amount of energy men devote to training for
fighting or time spent on war expeditions among hunter-gatherers is not great…
Conflicts within bands are normally settled by the departure of one of the
parties to the dispute.20
Such evidence completely refutes claims by people such as Ardrey that the
whole prehistory of humanity, from the time of Australopithecus—the first
ape-like animal to walk on two legs—through to the emergence of literacy,
was based on the ‘killing imperative’, that ‘hunter-gatherer bands fought over
water holes which tended all too often to vanish under the baking African sun’,
that we are all ‘Cain’s children’, that ‘human history has turned on the
development of superior weapons…for genetic necessity’, and that, therefore,
only a thin veneer of ‘civilisation’ conceals an instinctive ‘delight in massacre,
slavery, castration and cannibalism’.21
This is of immense importance for any arguments about ‘human nature’.
For, if such a nature exists, it was moulded by natural selection during the long
epoch of hunting and gathering. Richard Lee is quite right to insist:
It is the long experience of egalitarian sharing that has moulded our past.
Despite our seeming adaptation to life in hierarchical societies, and despite the
rather dismal track record of human rights in many parts of the world, there are
signs that humankind retains a deep-rooted sense of egalitarianism, a deep-
rooted commitment to the norm of reciprocity, a deep-rooted…sense of
community.22
From a very different perspective, Friedrich von Hayek, the favourite
economist of Margaret Thatcher, complained that humans have ‘long-
submerged innate instincts’ and ‘primordial emotions’ based on ‘sentiments
that were good for the small band’, leading them to want ‘to do good to known
people’.23
‘Human nature’ is, in fact, very flexible. In present day society it enables
some people, at least, to indulge in the greed and competitiveness that Hayek
enthused over. It has also permitted, in class societies, the most horrific
barbarities—torture, mass rape, burning alive, wanton slaughter. Behaviour
was very different among foraging peoples because the requirements of
obtaining a livelihood necessitated egalitarianism and altruism.
Hunters and gatherers were necessarily intensely dependent on one
another. The gatherers usually supplied the most reliable source of food, and
the hunters that which was most valued. So those who specialised in hunting
depended for their daily survival on the generosity of those who gathered,
while those who specialised in gathering—and those who were temporarily
unsuccessful in the hunt—relied for valued additions to their diet on those who
managed to kill animals. The hunt itself did not usually consist of an individual
male hero going off to make a kill, but comprised a group of men (sometimes
with the auxiliary assistance of women and children) working together to chase
and trap a prey. At every point, the premium was on cooperation and collective
values. Without them, no band of foragers could have survived for more than a
few days.
Linked to this was the absence of male supremacy over women. There was
almost always a division of labour between the sexes, with the men doing
most of the hunting and the women most of the gathering. This was because a
woman who was pregnant or breastfeeding a child could only take part in the
hunt by exposing it to dangers, and thus threatening the reproduction of the
band. But this division did not amount to male dominance as we know it. Both
women and men would take part in making key decisions, such as when to
move camp or whether to leave one band and join another. The conjugal unit
itself was loosely structured. Spouses could separate without suddenly
jeopardising their own livelihood or that of their children. Missing was the
male supremacism which is too often assumed to be part of ‘human nature’.24
Finally, there could not have been the obsession with private property that
we take for granted today. The normal size of foraging bands was always
restricted by the need to find enough food each day in the area of the camp.
Within that area, the individual members were continually moving from one
source of plant food to another, or in pursuit of animals, while the band as a
whole had to move on every so often as the food supplies in a locality were
used up. Such continual movement precluded any accumulation of wealth by
any band member, since everything had to be carried easily. At most an
individual may have had a spear or bow and arrow, a carrying bag or a few
trinkets. There would be no concept of the accumulation of personal wealth.
The material conditions in which human beings lived conspired to produce
very different societies and very different dominant ideas to those taken for
granted today.
The history of humanity over the last few thousand years is, above all, the
history of how such very different societies and sets of ideas developed. That
history is woven out of the actions of innumerable men and women, each
attempting to make decent lives for themselves, their companions and their
loved ones, sometimes accepting the world as it is, sometimes desperate to
change it, often failing, sometimes succeeding. Yet through these interminable,
interlinking stories two things stand out. On the one hand, there is the
cumulative increase in humanity’s ability to extract a livelihood from nature,
the overcoming of the primitive material conditions which were part of
‘primitive communism’. On the other, there is the rise of successive forms of
organisation of society that oppress and exploit the majority of people to the
benefit of a small, privileged minority.
If we trace these parallel sets of changes we will be able see, eventually,
how the world we face at the beginning of the 21st century arose. It is a world
in which wealth can be produced on a scale undreamt of even by our
grandparents, yet also a world in which the structures of class rule,
oppression, and violence can seem as firmly entrenched as ever. A billion
people live in desperate poverty, billions more are plagued by insecurity, wars
and civil wars are endemic, and the very bases of human life are at risk from
uncontrolled technological change. The dominating question for everybody
ought to be whether it is possible to use the wealth to satisfy basic human
needs by getting rid of the oppressive structures, to subordinate it to a society
based upon the values that characterised the lives of our ancestors for the
hundreds of generations of primitive communism.
But first, we have to look at how class rule and the state came into being.
Chapter 1
The neolithic ‘revolution’
The first big changes in people’s lives and ideas began to occur only about
10,000 years ago. People took up a new way of making a livelihood in certain
parts of the world, notably the ‘Fertile Crescent’ region of the Middle East.25
They learned to cultivate crops instead of relying upon nature to provide them
with vegetable foodstuffs, and to domesticate animals instead of simply hunting
them. It was an innovation which was to transform their whole way of living.
The transformation did not necessarily lead these people to have an easier
life than their forebears. But climatic changes gave some of them a very limited
choice.26 They had grown accustomed, over two or three millennia, to life in
areas where conditions had been such as to provide bountiful supplies of wild
plant food and animals to hunt—in one area in south east Turkey, for instance, a
‘family group’ could, ‘without working very hard’, gather enough grain from
wild cereals in three weeks to keep them alive for a year. They did not need to
be continually on the move like other peoples.27 They had been able to live in
the same places year after year, transforming their former rough camps into
permanent village settlements numbering hundreds rather than dozens of
people, storing foodstuffs in stone or baked clay pots, and accumulating a
range of sophisticated stone tools. For a period of time greater than from the
foundation of ancient Rome to the present day, they had been able to combine
the low workloads typical of foraging societies with the advantages of fixed
village life.
But then changes in the global climate prevented people obtaining an
adequate livelihood in this way. As conditions in the Fertile Crescent region
became drier and cooler, there was a decline in the availability of naturally
occurring wild grains and a fall in the size of the antelope and deer herds. The
hunter-gatherer villages faced a crisis. They could no longer live as they had
been living. If they were not to starve they either had to break up into small
groups and return to a long-forgotten nomadic way of life, or find some way to
make up for the deficiencies of nature by their own labour.
This path led to agriculture. People had accumulated immense amounts of
knowledge about plant life over hundreds of generations of living off wild
vegetation. Now some groups began to use this knowledge to guarantee food
supplies by planting the seeds of wild plants. Observation taught them that the
seeds of certain plants were much more fruitful than others and, by selecting
such seeds, they began to breed new, domesticated varieties which were much
more useful to them than wild plants could ever be. The regular harvests they
obtained enabled them to tether and feed the more tame varieties of wild
sheep, goats, cattle and donkeys, and to breed animals that were tamer still.
The first form of agriculture (often called ‘horticulture’) involved clearing
the land by cutting away at woodland and brush with axes and burning off the
rest, then planting and harvesting seeds using a hoe or a digging stick. After a
couple of years the land would usually be exhausted. So it would be allowed
to return to the wild and a new area would be cleared for cultivation.
Obtaining a livelihood in this way involved radical changes in patterns of
working and living together. People became more firmly rooted to their village
settlements than ever before. They had to tend the crops between planting and
harvesting and so could not wander off for months at a time. They also had to
work out ways of cooperating with each other to clear the land, to ensure the
regular tending of crops (weeding, watering and so on), the storing of harvests,
the sharing of stocks, and the rearing of children. Whole new patterns of social
life developed and, with them, new ways of viewing the world, expressed in
various myths, ceremonies and rituals.
The transformation is usually referred to as the ‘neolithic revolution’,28
after the increasingly sophisticated ‘neolithic’ (meaning ‘New Stone Age’)
tools associated with it. This involved a complete reorganisation of the way
people worked and lived, even if the process took place over a prolonged
period of time.
The archaeological evidence from the Fertile Crescent shows people
living in small villages as separate households, although it does not tell us
what the basis of these households was (whether, for instance, they were made
up of separate couples and their children; of a mother, her daughter and their
spouses; or of a father, his sons and their wives).29 There was still nothing
resembling class and state authority until many thousands of years after the first
turn to agriculture. In the ‘late Urbaid period’ (4000 BC), ‘significant
differentiation’ in ‘wealth was almost entirely absent’, and even in the
‘protoliterate period’ (toward 3000 BC), there was no indication that ‘the
processes of social stratification had as yet proceeded very far’.30 There was
no evidence of male supremacy, either. Some archaeologists have seen the
existence of clay or stone statuettes of fecund female figures as suggesting a
high status for women, so that men found it ‘natural’ to pray to women.31
However, one significant development was that weapons for warfare as well
as for hunting became more prevalent.
The pattern seems to have been very similar to that in horticulture-based
societies which survived into more recent times—in a few cases right through
to the 20th century—in various parts of the world. These societies varied
considerably, but did share certain general features.32
Households tended to be associated with cultivating particular bits of land.
But private property in land as we know it did not exist, and nor did the drive
of individuals or households to pile up stocks of personal possessions at the
expense of others. Instead, individual households were integrated into wider
social groupings, ‘lineages’ of people, who shared (or at least purported to
share) the same ancestry. These provided individuals and households with
clearly defined rights and obligations towards others to whom they were
related directly, or linked to through marriage or through ‘age group’
associations. Each was expected to share food with the others, so that no
household would suffer because of the failure of a crop or because it had more
young children to bring up than others. Prestige came not from individual
consumption, but from the ability to help make up for the deficiencies of others.
Many core values remained much closer to those of hunter-gatherer
societies than to those we take for granted in class societies. Thus, an early
18th century observer of the Iroquois horticulturists noted, ‘If a cabin of hungry
Iroquois meets another whose provisions are not entirely exhausted, the latter
share with the newcomers the little which remains to them without waiting to
be asked, although they expose themselves thereby to the same dangers of
perishing as those whom they help’.33 A classic study of the Nuer noted, ‘In
general it can be said that no one in a Nuer village starves unless all are
starving’.34
Once again, the explanation for such ‘altruism’ lay in the requirements of
obtaining a livelihood. It made sure, for example, that households with lots of
labour but few mouths to feed provided assistance to those which had lots of
mouths but little labour—especially those with many young children.35
Children represented the future labour supply of the village as a whole. Such
‘redistributional’ mechanisms towards the biggest families were necessary if
the group was to be protected from dying out.
Under hunting and gathering, the need to carry children on the daily round
of gathering and on the periodic moves of the whole camp had led to very low
birth rates. Women could not afford to have more than one child who required
carrying at a time, so births were spaced every three or four years (if
necessary through sexual abstention, abortion or infanticide). With a fixed
village life based on agriculture, the child did not have to be carried once it
was a few months old, and the greater the number of children, the greater the
area of land that could be cleared and cultivated in future. The premium was
on larger families. The change in the method of production also had a profound
impact on reproduction. Populations began to expand. Although the rate of
growth was small by present standards (0.1 percent a year),36 it quadrupled
over two millennia, beginning the climb which took it from perhaps ten million
at the time of the neolithic revolution to 200 million at the beginning of
capitalism.
There were other big changes in horticulture-based societies compared
with those of hunter-gatherers. A big dispute in a band of hunter-gatherers
could be solved simply by the band splitting or by individuals leaving. This
option was hardly open to a group of agriculturists once they had cleared and
planted their land. The village was larger and depended on a more complex,
organised interaction between people than did the hunter-gatherer band. At the
same time it faced a problem which hunter-gatherers did not—it had stocks of
stored food and artefacts which provided a motive for attacks by armed raiders
from outside. War, virtually unknown among hunter-gatherers, was endemic
among many horticultural peoples. This gave a further impetus to formal
decision-making mechanisms designed to exercise social control—to councils
made up of senior figures in each lineage, for example.
People have made the move from hunting and gathering to farming in
several parts of the world, independently of each other, in the ten millennia
since—in Meso-America (present day Mexico and Guatemala), in the Andean
region of South America, in at least three distinct parts of Africa, in Indochina,
in the Highland valleys of central Papua New Guinea, and in China.37 In each
case, changes occurred similar to those in Mesopotamia, although the different
plants and animals available for domestication had an important impact on
exactly how and to what degree. The evidence refutes any claim that some
‘race’ or ‘culture’ had a special ‘genius’ which led the rest of humanity
forward. Rather, faced with changes in climate and ecology, different human
groups in different parts of the world found they had to turn to new techniques
to sustain anything like their old way of life—and found their ways of life
began to change anyway, in a manner they could hardly have expected. In each
case, the loose band gave way to life in villages, organised through strongly
structured kin groups, rigid norms of social behaviour and elaborate religious
rituals and myths.38
A typical example of the independent development of agriculture was in
Highland Papua New Guinea. Here people began domesticating and cultivating
a variety of crops in about 7000 BC—sugar cane, certain varieties of bananas,
a nut tree, the giant swamp taro, edible grass stems, roots and green
vegetables. With cultivation they turned, as elsewhere, from nomadic or semi-
nomadic hunter-gathering to village life. Their social organisation was centred
on egalitarian kinship groups, and there was no private ownership of land.
People continued to live like this, in valleys remote and virtually impenetrable
from the coast, undisturbed by outside intrusion until they were ‘discovered’ by
Westerners in the early 1930s.
Many early societies did not turn to agriculture. Some put up resistance to
what they saw as needless drudgery when they could make a comfortable
living through hunting and gathering. Others lived in environments—such as
California, Australia and southern Africa—which provided neither plants nor
animals that were easy to domesticate.39 The groups which inhabited these
regions for millennia had little choice but to subsist by hunting and gathering
until contact with outsiders provided domesticated species from elsewhere.40
Once agriculture was established in any part of the world, however, it
proceeded to spread. Sometimes the success of a people in adopting
agriculture encouraged others to imitate them. So the arrival of crop species
from the Fertile Crescent seems to have played a role in the rise of agriculture
in the Nile Valley, the Indus Valley and western Europe. Sometimes the spread
of agriculture was the inevitable result of the spread of peoples who already
practised it as their populations grew and some split off to build new villages
on previously uncultivated lands. It was in this way that Bantu speakers from
west Africa spread into the centre and eventually the south of the continent, and
Polynesians from south east Asia spread across the oceans to Madagascar off
the African coast, to Easter Island (only 1,500 miles from the South American
coast) and to New Zealand.
The existence of an agriculturist society often changed the lives of the
hunter-gatherer peoples who came into contact with it. They found they could
radically improve their livelihoods by exchanging products with nearby
agriculturists—fish, game or animal skins for grain, woven clothing or
fermented drinks. This encouraged some to turn to one aspect of agriculture,
the breeding and herding of animals, without also cultivating crops. Such
‘pastoralist peoples’ were soon to be found in Eurasia, Africa and the southern
Andes of South America, wandering the land between agricultural settlements
—sometimes raiding them, sometimes trading with them—and developing
characteristic patterns of social life of their own.
On occasions the spread of crop raising and herding led to one final
important change in social life—the first differentiation into social ranks. What
anthropologists call ‘chieftainships’ or ‘big men’ arose, with some individuals
or lineages enjoying much greater prestige than others, and this could culminate
in the establishment of hereditary chiefs and chiefly lineages. But even these
were not anything like the class distinctions we take for granted, with one
section of society consuming the surplus which others toil to produce.
Egalitarianism and sharing remained all-pervasive. Those people with
high status had to serve the rest of the community, not live off it. As Richard
Lee notes, there were the same ‘communal property concepts’ as in hunter-
gatherer societies: ‘Much of what tribute the chiefs receive is redistributed to
subjects, and the chiefs’ powers are subject to checks and balances by the
forces of popular opinion and institutions’.41 So among the Nambikwara of
South America, ‘Generosity is…an essential attribute of power’, and ‘the
chief’ must be prepared to use the ‘surplus quantities of food, tools, weapons
and ornaments’ under his control to respond ‘to the appeals of an individual, a
family or the band as a whole’ for anything they need.42 This could even result
in the leader having a harder time materially than those under him. Thus, among
the New Guinea Busama, the clubhouse leader ‘has to work harder than anyone
else to keep up his stocks of food…It is acknowledged he must toil early and
late—“his hands are never free from earth, and his forehead continually drips
with sweat”.’43
The ‘New Stone Age’ turn to agriculture transformed people’s lives,
spreading village living and warfare. To this extent it was indeed a certain sort
of ‘revolution’. But society still lacked most of the elements we take for
granted today: class division, the establishment of permanent state apparatuses
based on full time bureaucrats and bodies of armed men, the subordination of
women—none of these things had arisen. They would not do so until there was
a second series of changes in the ways people gained a livelihood—until what
Gordon Childe called the ‘urban revolution’ was superimposed on the
‘neolithic revolution’.
Chapter 2
The first civilisations
Civilisation, in the strict sense of people living in cities, goes back just over
5,000 years. The first indications of it are the great edifices found in very
different parts of the world—the pyramids of Egypt and Central America, the
ziggurats (staged tower temples) of Iraq, the palace of Knossos in Crete, the
fortress at Mycenae in mainland Greece, and the grid-planned 4,000 year old
cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-dero on the Indus. For this reason the
archaeologist Gordon Childe baptised the change ‘the urban revolution’.44 The
remains are stunning enough in themselves. Even more amazing is the fact that
they were built by peoples who a few generations previously had known
nothing but a purely rural life based on fairly rudimentary agriculture. Now
they were in possession of elaborate construction skills, capable of quarrying,
transporting, erecting and carving huge chunks of rock, and then decorating
them with elaborate artistic works—even, in certain cases (the Mesopotamian,
the Egyptian, the Ethiopian, the Chinese and the Meso-American), of
developing scripts with which to describe how they behaved and felt. In
Eurasia and Africa they also learnt at this stage to obtain copper and tin from
rock oxides, and some time afterwards to fuse them into a harder metal,
bronze, for making ornaments and weapons—hence the often used terms for the
period, the ‘Copper’ and ‘Bronze’ Ages.
None of this could have happened without a prior change in the way in
which people made their livelihood, a change that was initially centred on
agriculture. The earliest forms of agriculture, using fairly elementary
techniques and involving naturally found varieties of plants and animals, could
lead over generations to slow increases in agricultural productivity, enabling
some peoples to gain a satisfactory livelihood while continuing to enjoy
considerable leisure.45 But conditions were by no means always as idyllic as
is suggested by some romanticised ‘noble savage’ accounts of indigenous
peoples. There were many cases in which the growth in food output did little
more than keep abreast with the rise in population. People were exposed to
sudden famines by natural events beyond their control, ‘droughts or floods,
tempests or frosts, blights or hailstorms’.46 The history of the pre-Hispanic
peoples of Meso-America, for example, is one of years in which they found it
easy to feed themselves interspersed with unexpected and devastating
famines.47
There were only two options if such groups were to maintain their settled
way of life. One was to resort to raiding other agriculturists for food, so that
warfare became a growing feature of such societies. Stone battle axes and flint
daggers became increasingly common, for instance, in the later stages of the
neolithic revolution in Europe. The other option was to develop more intensive
and productive forms of agriculture. There was a premium on technological
innovation. Farming groups which undertook it could survive the threat of
famine. Those which did not eventually died out or fell apart.
Innovation could mean simply improving existing crop varieties or
learning to fatten domesticated animals more effectively. But it could also
mean much more far-reaching changes. One was the discovery, in Eurasia and
Africa, that large domesticated mammals (initially oxen, much later horses)
pulling a shaped piece of wood—a plough—through the soil could be much
more effective in breaking up the ground for sowing than any hand-held hoe.
Another was the building of dams and ditches to protect crops from flooding
and to channel water to areas of land that would otherwise become parched
and infertile. Then there was the collection of animal dung as fertiliser to
avoid exhausting the soil and having to clear new land every few years. Other
techniques discovered in one part of the world or another were the draining of
marshland, the digging of wells, the terracing of hillsides and the laborious
cultivation and then transplanting of rice seedlings (in southern China).
These new techniques, like all human labour, had a double aspect. On the
one hand they provided people with additional means of livelihood. Groups
which previously had only been able to produce enough for subsistence could
begin to produce a surplus. On the other hand, there were changes in people’s
social relations.
The new techniques depended upon different forms of cooperation
between people. The use of the plough, for instance, encouraged an increased
division of labour between the sexes, since it was a form of heavy labour not
easily done by women bearing or nursing children. The building and
maintenance of regular irrigation channels required the cooperation of dozens
or even hundreds of households. It also encouraged a division between those
who supervised work and those who undertook it. The storing of food
encouraged the emergence of groups responsible for maintaining and
supervising the food stocks. The existence of a surplus for the first time
permitted some people to be freed from agricultural activities to concentrate
on craftwork, preparing for warfare or exchanging local products for those of
other peoples.
Gordon Childe described the transformation which occurred in
Mesopotamia between 5,000 and 6,000 years ago as people settled in the river
valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates. They found land which was extremely
fertile, but which could only be cultivated by ‘drainage and irrigation works’,
which depended upon ‘cooperative effort’.48 More recently Maisels has
suggested people discovered that by making small breaches in the banks
between river channels they could irrigate wide areas of land and increase
output considerably. But they could not afford to consume all the extra harvest
immediately, so some was put aside to protect against harvest failure.49
Grain was stored in sizeable buildings which, standing out from the
surrounding land, came to symbolise the continuity and preservation of social
life. Those who supervised the granaries became the most prestigious group in
society, overseeing the life of the rest of the population as they gathered in,
stored and distributed the surplus. The storehouses and their controllers came
to seem like powers over and above society, the key to its success, which
demanded obedience and praise from the mass of people. They took on an
almost supernatural aspect. The storehouses were the first temples, their
superintendents the first priests.50 Other social groups congregated around the
temples, concerned with building work, specialised handicrafts, cooking for
and clothing the temple specialists, transporting food to the temples and
organising the long distance exchange of products. Over the centuries the
agricultural villages grew into towns and the towns into the first cities, such as
Uruk, Lagash, Nippur, Kish and Ur (from which the biblical patriarch Abraham
supposedly came).
A somewhat similar process occurred some two and a half millennia later
in Meso-America. Irrigation does not seem to have played such a central role,
at least initially, since maize was a bountiful enough crop to provide a surplus
without it in good years.51 But vulnerability to crop failures encouraged the
storage of surpluses and some form of co-ordination between localities with
different climates. There was a great advantage for the population as a whole
if a specialised group of people coordinated production, kept account of the
seasons and looked after the storehouses. Here, too, storehouses turned, over
time, into temples and supervisors into priests, giving rise to the successive
cultures of the Olmecs, Teotihuacan, the Zapotecs and the Mayas, as is shown
by their huge sculptures, magnificent pyramids, temples, ceremonial brick ball
courts and elaborately planned cities (Teotihuacan’s population rose to
perhaps 100,000 in the early centuries AD).
In both the Middle East and Meso-America something else of historic
importance occurred. The groups of priestly administrators who collected and
distributed the stockpiles belonging to the temples began to make marks on
stone or clay to keep a record of incomings and outgoings. Over time pictorial
images of particular things were standardised, sometimes coming to express
the sound of the word for the object they portrayed, until a way was provided
of giving permanent visual expression of people’s sentences and thoughts. In
this way writing was invented. The temple guardians also had time and leisure
to make detailed observations of the sky at night, correlating the movements of
the moon, the planets and the stars with those of the sun. Their ability to predict
future movements and events such as eclipses gave them a near magical status.
But they also learnt to produce calendars based on the moon and the sun which
enabled people to work out the best time of the year for planting crops. Such
efforts led to mathematics and astronomy taking root in the temples, even if in
the magical form of astrology. As Gordon Childe put it, ‘The accumulation of a
substantial social surplus in the temple treasuries—or rather granaries—was
actually the occasion of the cultural advance that we have taken as the criterion
of civilisation’.52
Once writing had been developed by the earliest civilisations in
Mesopotamia and Meso-America, it was adopted by many of the peoples who
came into contact with them, using their own variants to write in their own
languages. It spread at great speed across the Middle East some 5,000 years
ago, and on into central, eastern and south Asia, north east Africa and
Mediterranean Europe. It was used by all Meso-American civilisations from
the Olmecs on. There were, however, civilisations which managed to develop
to a high degree without writing—most significantly those in South America,
which used markings as an aid to memory without ever moving on to transcribe
the spoken word.
There is only room here to provide a few examples of the transition to
intensive agriculture and urban life. It happened in several different parts of the
world as people took up new ways of gaining a livelihood. There were also
many instances of agricultural societies going at least part of the way in this
direction, reaching a level where hundreds or even thousands of people could
be mobilised to construct imposing stone edifices—as with the stone temples
of the third and fourth millennium BC in Malta, the stone circles of western
Europe (of which Stonehenge is the best known), the giant statues of Easter
Island and the stepped platforms of Tahiti.53 Sometimes the move towards
‘civilisation’ would be influenced to some degree by developments
elsewhere.54 But this does not alter the fact that the processes leading to the
formation of towns and cities, and often to the invention of writing, began
independently in several different locations because of the internal dynamic of
society once agriculture advanced beyond a certain point. This makes a
nonsense of any claim that one group of the world’s people are somehow
‘superior’ to others because they arrived at ‘civilisation’ first.
Chapter 3
The first class divisions
The development of civilisation came at a price. In his account of the rise of
urban society Adams writes, ‘Tablets of the sign for “slave girl”’ are to be
found at ‘the very end of the protoliterate period’, about 3000 BC. The sign for
‘male slave’ occurs slightly later. This is followed by the first appearance of
different terms distinguishing ‘full, free citizen’ and ‘commoner or subordinate
status’.55 By this time ‘evidence for class differentiation is all too clear’. In
‘ancient Eshnunna the larger houses along the main roads…often occupied 200
square metres or more of floor area. The greater number of houses, on the other
hand, were considerably smaller…having access to the arterial roads only by
twisting, narrow alleys…Many do not exceed 50 square metres in total’.56
Adams continues:
At the bottom of the social hierarchy were slaves, individuals who could be
bought and sold…One tablet alone lists 205 slave girls and children who were
probably employed in a centralised weaving establishment…Other women
were known to be engaged in milling, brewing, cooking…Male slaves
generally are referred to as the ‘blind ones’ and apparently were employed in
gardening operations.57
The emergence of civilisation is usually thought of as one of the great steps
forward in human history—indeed, as the step that separates history from
prehistory. But it was accompanied wherever it happened by other, negative
changes: by the development for the first time of class divisions, with a
privileged minority living off the labour of everyone else, and by the setting up
of bodies of armed men, of soldiers and secret police—in other words, a state
machine—so as to enforce this minority’s rule on the rest of society. The
existence of slavery, the physical ownership of some people by others, is
palpable proof of this development, not only in Mesopotamia but in many other
early civilisations. It shows how far social differentiation had gone since the
days of kin-based societies and village communities. But slavery was of
relatively minor significance in providing for the early Mesopotamian ruling
class. Much more important was the exploitation of peasants and other
labourers forced to provide labour to the temples and the upper classes. There
were groups such as the ‘shub-lugals’—‘a group with a reduced status and
degree of freedom, reported as labouring in gangs on demesne lands of the Bau
temple or estate, pulling ships, digging irrigation canals, and serving as a
nucleus of the city militia.’ They received subsistence rations during four
months of the year in return for labour service and were ‘allotted small plots
of…land from holdings of the temple or estate’.58 Such groups had once been
independent peasant households, but had been forced into dependency on more
powerful groupings, especially the temple.
Gordon Childe summarises an edict from the city of Lagash of around 2500
BC which describes how ‘favoured priests practised various forms of
extortion (overcharging for burials, for instance) and treated the god’s (ie the
community’s) land, cattle and servants as their own private property and
personal slaves. “The high priest came into the garden of the poor and took
wood therefrom…If a great man’s house adjoined that of an ordinary citizen”,
the former might annex the humble dwelling without paying any proper
compensation to its owner.’ He concludes, ‘This archaic text gives us
unmistakable glimpses of a real conflict of class…The surplus produced by the
new economy was, in fact, concentrated in the hands of a relatively small
class’.59
The scale of exploitation grew until it was massive. T B Jones tells how in
the city state of Lagash in about 2100 BC ‘a dozen or more temple
establishments were responsible for cultivating most of the arable land…
About half [the crop] was consumed by the cost of production [wages for
workers, feed for draught animals and the like] and a quarter went to the king
as royal tax. The remaining 25 percent accrued to the priests’.60
C J Gadd notes that in the famous Sumerian epic of Gilgamesh, ‘The hero
is represented…looking at the wall of Uruk, which he had just built, and
beholding the corpses which floated upon the river; such may indeed have been
the end of the poorest citizens’.61
In Meso-America the pattern was essentially similar. Even with the first
civilisation, that of the Olmecs, Katz observes ‘marked degrees of social
stratification’, with ‘pretentious burial grounds furnished with rich gifts’ and ‘a
representation…of a man kneeling in front of another who is richly clad…a
nobleman and his subordinate’.62 Among the Mayas ‘multi-roomed buildings
or palaces’ proved society was ‘sharply differentiated into elite and commoner
strata’.63
Why did people who had not previously exploited and oppressed others
suddenly start doing so, and why did the rest of society put up with this new
exploitation and oppression? The record of hundreds of thousands of years of
hunter-gatherer society and thousands of years of early agricultural society
show that ‘human nature’ does not automatically lead to such behaviour.64
The only account of human society which comes to terms with the change
is that outlined by Karl Marx in the 1840s and 1850s and further elaborated by
Frederick Engels. Marx put the stress on the interaction between the
development of ‘relations of production’ and ‘forces of production’. Human
beings find new ways of producing the necessities of life, ways that seem
likely to ease material problems. But these new ways of producing begin to
create new relations between members of the group. At a certain point they
either have to embrace the new ways of relating to each other or reject the new
ways of making a livelihood.
Classes began to arise out of certain of these changes in making a
livelihood. Methods of production were open to the group that could enable it
to produce and store a surplus over and above what was needed to subsist. But
the new methods required some people to be freed from the immediate burden
of working in the fields to coordinate the activities of the group, and to ensure
that some of the surplus was not immediately consumed but set aside for the
future in storehouses.
The conditions of production were still precarious. A drought, a virulent
storm or a plague of locusts could destroy crops and turn the surplus into a
deficit, threatening general starvation and driving people to want to consume
the stores set aside for future production. In such circumstances, those freed
from manual labour to supervise production could find the only way to achieve
this task was to bully everyone else—to keep them working when tired and
hungry and to force them to put aside food stocks even when starving. The
‘leaders’ could begin to turn into ‘rulers’, into people who came to see their
control over resources as in the interests of society as a whole. They would
come to defend that control even when it meant making others suffer; they
would come to see social advance as dependent on themselves remaining fit,
well and protected from the famines and impoverishment that periodically
afflicted the population as a whole. In short, they would move from acting in a
certain way in the interests of the wider society to acting as if their own
sectional interests were invariably those of society as a whole. Or, to put it
another way, for the first time social development encouraged the development
of the motive to exploit and oppress others.
Class divisions were the other side of the coin of the introduction of
production methods which created a surplus. The first farming communities
had established themselves without class divisions in localities with
exceptionally fertile soil. But as they expanded, survival came to depend on
coping with much more difficult conditions—and that required a reorganisation
of social relations.65
Groups with high prestige in preceding non-class societies would set about
organising the labour needed to expand agricultural production by building
irrigation works or clearing vast areas of new land. They would come to see
their own control of the surplus—and the use of some of it to protect
themselves against natural vicissitudes—as in everyone’s interest. So would
the first groups to use large scale trade to increase the overall variety of goods
available for the consumption of society and those groups most proficient at
wresting surpluses from other societies through war.
Natural catastrophes, exhaustion of the land and wars could create
conditions of acute crisis in a non-class agricultural society, making it difficult
for the old order to continue. This would encourage dependence on new
productive techniques. But these could only be widely adopted if some
wealthy households or lineages broke completely with their old obligations.
What had been wealth to be given away to others in return for prestige became
wealth to consume while others suffered: ‘In advanced forms of
chieftainship…what begins with the would-be headman putting his production
to others’ benefit ends, to some degree, with others putting their production to
the chief’s benefit’.66
At the same time warfare allowed some individuals and lineages to gain
great prestige as they concentrated loot and the tribute from other societies in
their hands. Hierarchy became more pronounced, even if it remained hierarchy
associated with the ability to give things to others.67
There was nothing automatic about this process. In many parts of the world
societies were able to prosper right through to modern times without resorting
to labour intensive methods such as the use of heavy ploughs or extensive
hydraulic works. This explains the survival until relatively recent times of
what are misleadingly called ‘primitive’ societies in Papua New Guinea, the
Pacific islands and parts of Africa, the Americas and south east Asia. But in
other conditions survival came to depend on adopting new techniques. Ruling
classes arose out of the organisation of such activities and, with them, towns,
states and what we usually call civilisation. From this point onwards the
history of society certainly was the history of class struggle. Humanity
increased its degree of control over nature, but at the price of most people
becoming subject to control and exploitation by privileged minority groups.
Such groups could only keep the surplus in their own hands at times when
the whole of society was suffering great hardship if they found ways of
imposing their will on the rest of society by establishing coercive structures—
states. Control over the surplus provided them with the means to do so, by
hiring armed men and investing in expensive techniques such as metal working
which could give them a monopoly of the most efficient means of killing.
Armed force is most effective when backed by legal codes and ideologies
which sanctify ruling class power by making it seem like the source of
people’s livelihoods. In Mesopotamia, for example, ‘Early kings boast of their
economic activities, of cutting canals, of building temples, of importing timber
from Syria, and copper and granite from Oman. They are sometimes depicted
on monuments in the garb of bricklayers or masons and of architects receiving
the plan of the temple from the gods’.68
Not only could rulers think of themselves as the embodiment of society’s
highest values—so too, in certain circumstances, could those they exploited.
By the very fact of absorbing society’s surplus, of having control of its means
of reproducing itself, the rulers could come to symbolise society’s power for
those below them—to be seen as gods, or at least as the necessary
intermediaries between the mass of society and its gods. Hence the god-like
attributes of the pharaohs of Egypt or the priestly attributes of the first ruling
classes of Mesopotamia and Meso-America.
Religious notions of sorts had existed in pre-class societies. People had
ascribed to magical beings control over the apparently mysterious processes
which led some plants to flower and not others, to the years of bountiful
hunting and years of hunger, to unexpected and sudden deaths. With the
appearance of classes and states people also had to come to terms with the
existence of social powers beyond their own control. It was at this stage that
organised religious institutions arose. Worshipping the gods became a way of
society worshipping its own power, of people giving an alienated recognition
to their own achievements. This, in turn, enhanced the control of those who
claimed to be responsible for these achievements—those who ordered about
the mass of producers, monopolised the surplus in their own hands and used
armed force against anyone rejecting their claims.
Once such state structures and ideologies were in existence, they would
perpetuate the control of the surplus by a certain group even when it no longer
served the purpose of advancing production. A class that emerged as a spur to
production would persist even when it was no longer such a spur.
The character of the first class societies
We usually think of class societies as based on private property. But private
property is not a feature of all societies divided into classes. Karl Marx
referred to an ‘Asiatic’ form of class society in which private property did not
exist at all. Instead, he argued, the rulers were able, through their collective
control of the state machine, to exploit entire peasant communities which
farmed the land jointly without private ownership. He believed this picture
applied to Indian society at the time of the British conquest in the 18th century.
Much modern research suggests he was at least partially mistaken.69 But the
early history of the Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Chinese, Indian, Meso-American
and South American civilisations does seem to fit his model.
The social surplus was in the hands of the priests who ran the temples or
of the king-led administrators of the palaces. They got hold of it through their
direction of certain aspects of production—irrigation and flood control works,
the labour of dependent peasants on the temple or palace lands, and control
over trade. But neither the priests nor the palace administrators exercised
private control or ownership. They benefited from class exploitation only in so
far as they were part of a collective ruling group.
At the base of society peasant production does not seem to have been
based on private ownership of land, either. The communal forms of
organisation of economic life which characterise pre-class agricultural
societies still seem to have survived, although in a distorted form now that the
majority had lost control of the surplus. People still carried out their labours
on the basis of a system of reciprocal obligations to each other, organised
through the remnants of the old kin lineages. So in Mesopotamia patriarchal
clans (lineage groups run by the allegedly senior male) controlled the land not
in the hands of the temples, while the mass of peasant producers in Mexico as
late as the Aztec period (the 15th century) were organised through ‘calpulli’—
lineage groups which were ‘highly stratified internally’,70 with those at the top
imposing the demands of the ruling class on the rest—and among the Incas
through similar ‘aylulli’.71 Archaeologists and anthropologists have often used
the term ‘conical clans’ to describe such groups. They retained the formal
appearance of the lineages of pre-class society, linking groups of nuclear
families to a mythical common ancestor,72 but now organised the labour of the
exploited class in the interests of the exploiting class, acting as both units of
production and social control.
In much of Eurasia and Africa private property was to develop among both
the ruling class and the peasantry, but only over many centuries, with deep
splits within ruling classes, bloody wars and sharp conflicts between exploited
and exploiting classes.
Chapter 4
Women’s oppression
Women everywhere lost out with the polarisation of society into classes and
the rise of the state. There was a shift in their status, described by Frederick
Engels more than a century ago as ‘the world historic defeat of the female sex’.
From being co-decision-makers with men, they were thrust into a position of
dependence and subordination. The exact nature of the subordination varied
enormously from one class society to another, and from class to class in each
society. But it existed everywhere that class existed. So universal did it
become that even today it is usually treated as an invariant product of human
nature.
The change was rooted in the new relations that grew up between people
with the production of a surplus. The new intensive production techniques
tended to prioritise men’s labour over women’s for the first time. Gathering,
the main source of nutrition for hunter-gatherer societies, had been fully
compatible with childbearing and breastfeeding. So had early forms of
agriculture based on the hoe. But heavy ploughing and herding of cattle and
horses were not. Societies in which women did these things would have low
birthrates and stagnating populations, and lose out to societies which excluded
most women from these roles. Gordon Childe pointed out long ago that among
‘barbarians’, purely agricultural peoples, ‘whereas women normally hoe plots
it is men who plough. And even in the oldest Sumerian and Egyptian documents
the ploughmen really are males’.73 He suggested, ‘The plough…relieved
women of the most exacting drudgery, but deprived them of the monopoly over
the cereal crops and the social status which it conferred’.70 Key decisions
about the future of the household or lineage became male decisions, since it
was males who would implement them. Other changes which accompanied the
growth of the surplus had a similar impact. Women could engage in local trade,
and there were cases of women playing a part in warfare. But long distance
trade and serious soldiering became male monopolies. Warriors and merchants
were overwhelmingly male—and, as they increasingly exercised control over
the surplus, ownership and power tended to become male prerogatives. The
break up of the old clan lineages accentuated the trend. The individual adult
woman was no longer part of a wider network of relationships which gave her
some say over the use of productive means and some protection against
arbitrary treatment. Instead, she became simply a ‘wife’, a subordinate in a
strange household.75 Ruling class women were increasingly treated as one
more possession of a male controller of the surplus, valued as an ornament, a
source of sexual pleasure or as a breeder of heirs. They would be protected
from hardship and external dangers, but also cocooned from any interaction
with the wider social world. Life was very different for women in agricultural
or artisan households. They still had a productive role and were engaged in
endless toil. Nevertheless, it was their husbands who controlled relations
between the household and the rest of society, imposing on the women and
children the measures needed to ensure the household’s survival (including
successive pregnancies for the wife).76 Among the exploiting and the exploited
classes alike there was literally ‘patriarchy’—rule of the father over the other
members of the household. Its imprint was soon to be found in all ideologies
and all religions. Female gods and priestesses increasingly played a secondary
role, surviving as mother figures or symbols of beauty rather than as active
participants in the creation and organisation of the world.
Women’s roles were not changeless or uniform across all classes and
societies. Women’s oppression among the peasantry took a very different form
to that among the aristocracies—and a different form again among slaves who,
whether male or female, were not allowed to live in households of their own.
Widows were common everywhere, because of relatively high death rates
among young adults, and often ended up running a peasant or artisan household,
or even a kingdom, very much as a man would. In some societies women were
denied all rights—in others they were allowed to own and inherit property,
and to initiate divorce proceedings. The fact that women were everywhere
oppressed did not mean that their oppression was everywhere the same, as the
‘patriarchy’ theories so common among feminist academics in the 1980s
implied. It did, however, mean that their position was inferior to what it had
been under primitive communism.
The growth of the first exploiting classes further influenced the whole
development of society. The methods used by the exploiters to buttress their
rule began to eat up a major portion of society’s resources. Expenditures on
servants, on professional police or military forces, on building huge temples,
palaces or tombs to celebrate their powers, necessitated further exploitation
and oppression of the masses—and further justified exploitation and
oppression as the only way to keep society going. There was also an added
incentive for external warfare as a means of grabbing the resources of other
societies. Yet endemic war caused further suffering for the mass of people. It
also encouraged the emergence of ruling classes and states among neighboring
peoples, as they came to accept that only the centralisation of the surplus into a
few hands could provide them with the means of defence.77 Overall, however
‘functional’ for society as a whole the rise of a ruling group may once have
been, beyond a certain point it became a drag on society. This was shown
dramatically by events in the Middle East, the Indus Valley and the eastern
Mediterranean between 1,000 and 1,500 years after the rise of the first
civilisations.
Chapter 5
The first ‘Dark Ages’
No one who has seen the pyramids, temples, palaces or enormous statues of the
first civilisations can fail to be impressed. Not only were there these
monumental buildings. Just as impressive were stone houses that kept out the
wind and rain—even, in some cases, with water supplies and sewerage
systems. What is more, the people who built these did so without the
knowledge of hardened metals, using tools elaborated out of stone or wood
and sometimes copper or bronze.
The impact on the people who lived in and around these cities must have
been even greater. The pyramids of Giza or Teotihuacan, the ziggurats of Ur or
Uruk, dominating the skyline even more than the Empire State Building or the
Eiffel Tower, would have been ever-present symbols of the power, the
permanence and the stability of the state. They allowed the ruling class to
believe its power was as eternal and unquestionable as the movement of the
sun and the stars, while reinforcing feelings of powerlessness and
insignificance among the mass of people.
Yet if the pyramids, the statues and sometimes the buildings endured, the
societies which produced them sooner or later entered deep crisis. The city
states of Mesopotamia were involved in incessant warfare with each other
before succumbing in around 2300 BC to a conqueror from the north, Sargon,
who welded the whole Fertile Crescent into a great empire which fell prey to
other conquerors after his death. The ‘Old Kingdom’ Egypt of the pyramids of
Giza and Saqqara78 fell apart in a century and a half of civil war and massive
social disruption (the so called ‘first intermediate period’ of 2181 to 2040
BC). The Indus cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-dero were abandoned after
more than a millennium in around 1500 BC. About 100 years later it was the
turn of the civilisation of Crete, exemplified by the magnificent palace at
Knossos, to fall apart—to be followed soon after by the Myceneaen
civilisation which dominated mainland Greece. And just as the rise of
civilisation was replicated in Meso-America, so was the record of sudden
collapse. People abandoned, in turn, Teotihuacan, Monte Alban and the
southern Maya centres, leaving whole cities as empty monuments to bewilder,
in turn, the Aztecs, the Spanish Conquistadores and ourselves.
There has been much historical speculation as to what caused each of these
crises of early civilisation. But underlying the different attempts at explanation,
certain factors stand out.
First, there is the record of ever-greater expenditure of resources by the
ruling class on itself and its monuments. The temples, the palaces and the
tombs grew ever more extensive over the centuries, the opulence of upper
class lifestyles ever greater, the effort that went into extracting the surplus from
the cultivators ever more intense, the trade networks bringing rare products
over enormous distances ever longer.
In Egypt the surviving texts show the state administration to have been
‘mainly concerned with facilitating the transfer of produce’ to the various
centres which made up the ‘court’, and with supervising construction work
rather than with maintaining the agricultural system’, so putting ‘serious
pressures on the agricultural surplus’.79 The picture in Mesopotamia seems to
have been very similar, with the added pressure of war between the different
city states as well as with pastoral peoples around the fringes of their
civilisation.
The growth in the power and wealth of the ruling class drove the living
standards of the mass of people down to the minimum necessary for survival—
and sometimes even lower. So although the craftspeople working for the
temples or palaces developed new techniques, particularly in the use of copper
and bronze, ‘the peasant masses from whom…the surplus…was gathered could
hardly afford the new equipment. In practice, the cultivators and quarrymen of
Egypt had to be content with neolithic tools. Wool in Sumer was still plucked,
not shorn. Even in the Indus cities chert [stone] knives are common enough to
suggest a shortage of metal tools’.80
The ever-greater absorption of resources by the ruling class was
accompanied by a massive slowdown in the growth of humanity’s ability to
control and understand the natural world. Gordon Childe contrasted the
massive advances made by comparatively poor and illiterate communities in
the early period leading up to the ‘urban revolution’ with what followed the
establishment of the great states:
The two millennia immediately preceding 3000 BC had witnessed discoveries
in applied science that directly or indirectly affected the prosperity of millions
and demonstrably furthered the biological welfare of our species…artificial
irrigation using canals and ditches; the plough; the harnessing of animal
motive-power; the sailing boat; wheeled vehicles; orchard-husbandry;
fermentation; the production and use of copper; bricks; the arch; glazing; the
seal; and—in the early stage of the revolution—a solar calendar, writing,
numeral notation, and bronze…The 2,000 years after the revolution produced
few contributions of anything like comparable importance to human progress.81
The advances which did occur (‘iron, water wheels, alphabetic writing,
pure mathematics’) were not made inside the ‘great civilisations’, but among
‘barbarian peoples’ on their periphery.82
Bruce Trigger contrasts the early dynastic period in Egypt (3000-2800
BC), which ‘appears to have been a time of great creativity and inventiveness’
with the period after, when ‘control by scribes and bureaucrats’ discouraged
change in methods of production, so that ‘development ceased’.83
The sheer scale of the exploitation of the mass of the population—an
exploitation that grew in direct proportion to the growth in the magnificence of
the temples, palaces, tombs and ruling class lifestyles—ensured stagnation of
the means of providing a livelihood for society as a whole.
That section of society which had been freed from daily toil in the fields
no longer had any interest in furthering humanity’s control over nature. ‘Many
of the revolutionary steps in progress—harnessing animals’ motive power, the
sail, metal tools—originally appeared as “labour saving devices”. But the new
rulers now commanded almost unlimited resources of labour…they saw no
need to bother about labour saving inventions’.84 Rulers who reinforced their
power over the masses by encouraging superstition—the Sumerian kings and
Egyptian pharaohs claimed god-like powers for themselves—had no interest in
encouraging scientific endeavour among society’s small literate minority of
priests and full time administrators. These were stuck with the body of
knowledge developed early in the urban revolution, treating it with almost
religious reverence, copying texts and transmitting established ideas, but no
longer attempting new lines of enquiry. Not for the last time in history, science
degenerated into scholasticism and scholasticism into magic as the centuries
proceeded.85 The literate elite ended up holding back rather than advancing
humanity’s control over nature.
A ruling class that had arisen out of advances in human productive powers
now prevented further advances. But without such advances its own
rapaciousness was bound to exhaust society’s resources, until the means of
livelihood became insufficient to provide for the mass of the population. At
that point it only required a slight change in climate for people to starve and
society to shake to its core. This happened in Egypt at the end of the ‘Old
Kingdom’, when a fall in the level of the Nile floods caused difficulties with
irrigation. Willey and Shimkin suggest similar ‘over-exploitation’ by the ruling
class brought about the collapse of the ‘classic’ Mayan civilisation of Meso-
America about 1,200 years ago:
A growing upper class, together with its various retainers and other members
of the incipient ‘middle class’, would have increased economic strain on the
total society…Malnutrition and disease burdens increased among the
commoner population and further decreased its work capacity…Despite these
internal stresses, the Maya of the late classic period apparently made no
technological or social adaptive innovations…In fact, the Maya elite persisted
in its traditional direction up to the point of collapse.86
Class struggles in the first civilisations
The impoverishment of the exploited classes responsible for feeding the rest of
society necessarily brought a clash of interests between the different classes.
The basic class divide was that between the ruling minority and the mass
of dependent peasant cultivators. The growing exactions of the rulers must
have caused clashes between the two. But, to be honest, we know little about
these. In so far as tomb paintings or temple inscriptions depict the mass of
people, it is as people bowing down to and waiting on their ‘superiors’. This
is hardly surprising—it has been the preferred way of depicting the masses for
ruling classes throughout history.
Nevertheless, a number of archaeologists and historians suggest the
collapse of Egypt’s Old Kingdom involved a ‘social revolution’, quoting a
later text known as the ‘Admonitions of the Ipuwer’, which imagines a
situation in which ‘servant girls can usurp the places of their mistresses,
officials are forced to do the bidding of uncouth men, and the children of
princes are dashed against the wall’.87 In a somewhat similar way, the collapse
of the Meso-American civilisations of Teotihuacan, Monte Alban and the
southern Mayas is often ascribed to peasant revolts.88
But the tensions that arose were not just between the rulers and the
exploited peasants. The evidence from all the early civilisations points to
growing fissures within the ruling class.
In Mesopotamia and Meso-America the first ruling classes seem to have
been the priests of the temples. But kings began to emerge in Mesopotamia
alongside the priesthoods as secular administration and warfare became
important, and a non-priestly aristocracy with its own estates (and dependent
peasant cultivators) rose alongside those of the temples and the royal palace.
Similarly, in Meso-America the warrior elite seems to have enjoyed growing
power.89
In Egypt the kings were dependent on regional priests and governors for
administering the 500 miles of the Nile Valley and ensuring the continual flow
of food, material and labour to the royal capital. Land grants used to buy the
loyalty of such groups enabled them, over the centuries, to siphon off a chunk
of the total surplus for themselves and to exercise a degree of power
independent of the central monarch. One sign of this was the way in which
priests and civil administrators began to build lavish tombs imitative of the
pharaohs, even if considerably smaller.
The rise of new exploiting groups alongside the old had a double effect.
On the one hand, it meant an ever larger layer of people living off the surplus
and put increased pressure on the cultivators. On the other, it meant challenges
could arise to the monolithic power of the original rulers, from people who
themselves controlled resources, armed power or the dissemination of ideas.
So it seems the collapse into crisis of Old Kingdom Egypt was, in part at least,
a result of provincial governors and chief priests putting their own interests
above those of the central monarchy—leading, according to Kemp, to ‘civil
war…among men whose aspirations were of a thoroughly traditional nature’.90
The splits within the ruling class were accompanied by the growth of new
subordinate classes. Specialist groups of craft workers—carpenters,
stonemasons, leather workers, weavers, workers in metals—had begun to
appear as increased agricultural productivity allowed some people to be freed
from working in the fields. The concentration of a growing surplus in the hands
of the ruling classes gave an added impetus. The priests and kings demanded
an ever growing supply of luxury goods for themselves and their attendants
along with ever more elaborate temples, tombs and palaces. But this meant
concentrating around the palaces, tombs and temples the skilled labour which
could make such things. A whole new class of artisans grew up as part of the
core population of the new cities.
Typical were those who built the pyramids of Giza and carved out the
tombs in Egypt’s Valley of the Kings. ‘Contrary to popular belief’ these ‘were
not constructed by slaves, nor…by men who were subsequently put to death in
order to protect hidden royal treasures’.91 The forced labour of large numbers
of peasants may have been used to move huge chunks of rock. But writings
from the middle of the 2nd millennium BC in Thebes (present day Luxor) show
the quarrying, carving and carpentry to have been the work of skilled
craftsmen. They lived in a special village of stone houses and were paid
sufficient wages in the form of grain, oil and fish to keep a family of ten—
giving them an income about three times that of the average land worker. Their
eight hour day left many with time to improve their living standards by doing
additional private work, and some were skilled enough to be among the very
few people able to read and write. They were not completely free. They were
subject to arbitrary acts of oppression from the scribes and foremen in charge
of them and, on at least one occasion, those deemed ‘surplus’ to the
requirements of the pharaoh’s vizier were compelled to undertake forced
labour.92 But in 1170 BC, backed by their wives, they took part in history’s
first recorded strikes when their rations were late and their families faced
hunger.93
These were not wage workers in the modern sense, since they were not
free to choose who they worked for, were paid in kind and depended for their
livelihood on the centralised distribution of goods by the state. This limited
their ability to act independently of the state or to develop views which
challenged it. Significantly, they worshipped the gods of the royal class and
deified kings as well as favoured gods of their own. Nevertheless,
geographical concentration and literacy had given an oppressed and exploited
class the confidence to challenge the rulers of a kingdom a millennium and a
half old. It was a portent for the distant future, when there would be such a
class hundreds of millions strong.
A trader class began to develop alongside the artisan class in most of the
early civilisations. Trade had already taken place in pre-class societies: flints
mined in one place would be used hundreds of miles away, for instance. Now
it grew in importance as the emerging ruling class sought luxuries and raw
materials for the building of temples and palaces. Many of these could only be
obtained if individuals or groups were prepared to make long, arduous and
often dangerous journeys. Such people were scarcely likely to be from the
pampered ranks of the ruling class itself. They were either from the exploited
cultivator class or from outside the cities, especially from the pastoralist
groups who roamed the open lands between the urban centres. As trade grew
in importance, so did the traders, beginning to accumulate enough wealth to be
able exert pressure of their own on the ruling class. A point was eventually
reached when towns and cities began to develop which were run by the trading
merchant classes—like the city of Sippar in the Fertile Crescent.
But the trading class mostly existed on the margin of the wider society,
even if the margin grew over time. As with the artisans, there is little
indication of the merchants developing a view of their own as to how society
should be run.
The result of the underdevelopment of the artisan and merchant classes
was that when society entered great crises there was no social group with the
power or the programme to fight to reorganise it. The existing ruling class was
no longer capable of developing human control over nature sufficiently to ward
off widespread immiseration and starvation. But there were no other groups
capable of doing so either. The mass of cultivators could rise up against their
exploiters. But their response to starvation was to consume the whole harvest,
leaving nothing to sustain the structures of civilisation—the towns, the literate
strata, the groups caring for the canals and dams.
The result can be seen most clearly in the case of the civilisations which
collapsed—Crete and Mycenae, Harsappa and Mohenjo-dero, Teotihuacan,
Monte Alban and the Mayas. The cities were abandoned, the flowering
cultures all but forgotten, as the mass of people returned to the purely
agricultural life of their ancestors half a millennium or more before.
Karl Marx wrote in his famous Preface to the Contribution to the Critique
of Political Economy, at a time when little was known about any of the
civilisations we have discussed:
In the social production of their life, men enter into definite relations that are
indispensable and independent of their will, relations of production which
correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productive
forces. The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic
structure of society, the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political
superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social
consciousness…At a certain stage in their development, the material
productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of
production, or—what is but a legal expression for the same thing—with the
property relations which have been at work hitherto. From forms of
development of the productive forces, these relations turn into their fetters.
Then begins an epoch of social revolution.94
But such an epoch could have more than one outcome. As Marx noted in
the Communist Manifesto, class struggles historically could end ‘either in a
revolutionary reconstitution of society at large, or in the mutual ruin of the
contending classes’.95
These cases confirm his account. A ruling class which once played a part
in developing the ‘forces of production’ did indeed become a fetter on their
subsequent growth, leading society as a whole into a period of social
upheaval. But because a class did not emerge which was associated with new,
more advanced ways of carrying out production and capable of imposing its
will on society as a whole by overthrowing the old ruling class, the crisis did
not lead to a further growth of the productive forces. Instead, there was the
‘mutual ruin of the contending classes’ and a reversion, quite literally, to
‘barbarism’, to societies without towns, literacy or advanced techniques.
Conquest and change
The histories of Egypt and Mesopotamia do not fit as neatly into Marx’s
pattern. In these cases a re-establishment of order and the old rhythms of social
life followed a period of a century or more of disorder, civil war and famine.
Shifts of power within the ruling class (from priests to warriors in
Mesopotamia, from Memphis to Thebes in the case of Egypt), combined with
an influx of wealth from foreign conquest in Mesopotamia’s case and an
improvement in the level of the Nile in Egypt’s, were enough to overcome the
immediate economic crisis and get society proceeding along basically its old
lines for several hundred years more. But the fundamental causes of the crisis
were not removed. The societies still lacked the innovative push of the early
years of the urban revolution, still could not develop new ways of providing a
livelihood except at the slowest pace, and were still prone to new catastrophic
crises. In Mesopotamia conquerors emerged (either from existing cities or
from the pastoralists around the periphery of the region) who established great,
centralised empires and held them together by marching their armies from one
urban centre to another to crush any resistance to their rule. But this further
exhausted society’s resources and drained the imperial coffers until the central
ruler opted to allow local aristocracies to maintain ‘order’ in their patches,
and to absorb much of the surplus. The result was to weaken the defence of the
whole empire, leaving it open to seizure either by a rebel military leader from
within or by a conqueror from outside.
Hence the succession of conquerors whose march through the history of the
Fertile Crescent is detailed in the Old Testament—the Amorites, Kassites,
Assyrians, Hittites, Medes and Persians.
Egypt was protected by the deserts from military incursion from outside
for several hundred years. But this did not prevent another great crisis, the
‘second intermediate period’ around 1700-1600 BC. Now foreign influences
were at work with a vengeance. In the north the ‘Hyksos’ people—almost
certainly from Palestine—established themselves as pharaohs, while in the
south the Nubian kingdom of Kush exercised hegemony. Both Palestine and
Nubia were the location of fast-developing societies at a time when Egypt was
stagnating. Significantly, the Hyksos made use of technical innovations not
previously adopted in Egypt, especially the wheel. The Egyptian rulers who
threw out the Hyksos and established the ‘New Kingdom’ in 1582 BC were
only able to do so by adopting these innovations and, it seems, allowing a
greater leeway for the development of artisan and merchant groups.
Childe claimed that both ‘the rejuvenated civilisations of Mesopotamia
and Egypt differed from their parents most significantly in the greater
prominence of their middle class of merchants, professional soldiers, clerks,
priests and skilled artisans, no longer embedded in the “great households” but
subsisting independently alongside these’.96
Certainly there is a sharp contrast between the stagnation that characterises
the later Old Kingdom and Middle Kingdom on the one hand and the dynamism
of the early centuries of the New Kingdom on the other. This was a period of
foreign conquests by the pharaohs into Palestine and Syria and south into
Africa. The conquests brought a flow of new raw materials and luxury goods.
At the same time the domestic surplus was now large enough to provide for the
most elaborate tombs and luxurious palaces, not only for the pharaohs but also
for chief priests and regional officials. Underlying this seems to have been a
spurt in the development of production. Bronze—with its harder, less easily
blunted cutting edge—increasingly replaced copper. Horse-drawn wheeled
vehicles were mainly used in warfare, but also speeded up internal
communications. For the peasant, irrigation became easier with the
introduction of the shaduf, a pole and bucket lever that could raise water a
metre out of a ditch or stream.97
Foreign invasion had shaken up the Egyptian social structure just enough to
allow improved means of making a livelihood to break through after close on
1,000 years of near-stagnation. It suggests that in certain circumstances, even
when an emerging social class based on new relations of production is not
strong, external force can overcome, at least temporarily, the suffocation of
social life by an old superstructure.
Part two
The ancient world
Chronology
1000 to 500 BC
Spread of iron making, weapons and tools across Asia, Europe, and west and
central Africa. Phonetically based scripts in Middle East, Indian subcontinent
and Mediterranean area.
Clearing and cultivation of Ganges valley in India, new civilisation, rise of
four caste system, Vedic religion.
Phoenician, Greek and Italian city states. Unification of Middle East into rival
empires based on Mesopotamia or Nile. Emergence of a small number of
‘warring states’ in China.
600 to 300 BC
Flowering of ‘classical’ civilisations. Confucius and Mencius in China. The
Buddha in India. Aeschylus, Plato, Aristotle, Democritus in Greece. Class
struggles in Greece.
Conquest of Middle East by Macedonian armies of Alexander and of most of
Indian subcontinent by Mauryan Empire of Ashoka.
Struggles between Plebeians and Patricians in Rome. City conquers most of
Italy.
300 to 1 BC
Disintegration of Mauryan Empire in India, but continued growth of trade and
handicraft industry. Hindu Brahmans turn against cow slaughter.
First Ch’in emperor unifies north China. Massive growth of iron working,
handicraft industries and trade. Building of Great Wall and of canal and road
systems. Peasant revolt brings Han Dynasty to power.
Rome conquers whole Mediterranean region and Europe south of Rhine.
Spread of slavery and impoverishment of peasantry in Italy. Peasants support
Gracchus brothers, murdered in 133 and 121. Slave revolts in Sicily (130s)
and in Italy under Spartacus (70s). Civil wars. Julius Caesar takes power 45.
Augustus becomes emperor 27.
AD 1 to 200
Peak of Roman Empire. Crushes revolt in Palestine AD 70. Paul of Tarsus
splits new sect of ‘Christians’ away from Judaism.
Discovery of steel making in China. Extension of Han Empire into Korea,
central Asia, south China, Indochina. Confucianism state ideology.
Spread of peasant agriculture and Hinduism into south India and then to Malay
peninsular and Cambodia. Indian merchants finance great Buddhist
monasteries, carry religion to Tibet and Ceylon.
AD 200 to 500
Chinese Han Empire disintegrates. Collapse of urban economy, fragmentation
of countryside into aristocratic estates, loss of interest in ‘classic’ literature.
Buddhism spreads among certain groups.
Gupta Empire unites much of in India in 5th century, flowering of art and
science.
Growing crises in Roman Empire. Technological and economic stagnation.
Trade declines. Slavery gives way to taxes and rents from peasants bound to
land. Peasant revolts in France and Spain. Increased problems in defending
empire’s borders. Rise of cults of Osiris, Mithraism and Christianity.
Constantine moves capital to Greek city of Byzantium (330), makes
Christianity the empire’s official religion. Persecution of pagan religions, other
Christian beliefs and Jews. Rise of monasticism. Division of empire. Loss of
England to empire (407). Alarick’s Goths sack Rome (410).
AD 500 and after
‘Dark Ages’ in western Europe. Population falls by half. Collapse of trade,
town life and literacy.
Eastern empire survives to reach peak under Justinian in 530s-550s, with
building of Saint Sophia cathedral, then declines.
Collapse of Gupta Empire in India. Decline of trade, towns, use of money and
Buddhist religion. Agriculture and artisan trades carried out in virtually self
contained villages for benefit of feudal rulers. Ideological domination by
Brahman priests. Full establishment of elaborate hierarchy of many castes.
Decline in literature, art and science.
Continued fragmentation of China until rise of Sui Dynasty (581) and then
T’ang Dynasty (618) see revival of economy and trade.
Chapter 1
Iron and empires
The second great phase in the history of civilisation began among the peasants
and pastoralists who lived in the lands around the great empires, not in the
states dominated by the priests and pharaohs. It depended on the efforts of
people who could learn from the achievements of the urban revolution—use
copper and bronze, employ the wheel, even adapt foreign scripts to write
down their own languages—without being sucked dry by extortion and
brainwashed by tradition.
There were societies across wide swathes of Eurasia and Africa which
began to make use of the technological advances of the ‘urban revolution’.
Some developed into smaller imitations of the great empires—as seems to
have been the case with Solomon’s empire in Palestine, described in the Old
Testament. Others were much less burdened, at first, with elaborate, expensive
and stultifying superstructures. There was greater freedom for people to
innovate; and also greater incentive for them to do so.
The adoption of these techniques was accompanied by concentration of the
surplus in the hands of ruling classes, much as had happened in the original
urban revolutions. But these were new ruling classes, from lands with lower
natural fertility than those of the early civilisations. Only if they encouraged
new techniques could they obtain a level of surplus comparable to that of those
civilisations.
They could then take advantage of the crises of the ancient civilisations,
tearing at them from the outside just as class tensions weakened them from
within. ‘Aryans’ from the Caspian region fell upon the decaying Indus
civilisation; people from south east Europe, speaking a related ‘Indo-
European’ language, tore at Mycenaean Greece; a little known group, the ‘Sea
People’, attacked Egypt; the Hittites captured Mesopotamia; and a new Chou
dynasty ousted the Shang from China.
In Mesopotamia, Egypt and China the essential continuity of civilisation
was unaffected and empires soon re-emerged, revitalised by new techniques.
The conquest of the Indus and Mycenaean civilisations led to the complete
disappearance both of urban life and of literacy. Yet external incursion was not
wholly negative even in these cases. It played a contradictory role. On the one
hand, the conquerors destroyed part of the old productive apparatus—for
instance, the irrigation works that allowed the Indus cities to feed themselves.
On the other, they brought with them new technologies, such as the ox-drawn
plough which made possible the cultivation of the heavy soil of north India’s
plains. There was an expansion of peasant production, and eventually a much
larger surplus than previously in the region.
The most important new technique emerged around 2000 BC in the
Armenian mountains—and several hundred years later in west Africa.1 This
was the smelting of iron. Its slow diffusion transformed production and
warfare.
Copper and its alloy, bronze, had been in use since the early stages of the
urban revolution. But their production was expensive and depended on
obtaining relatively rare ores from distant locations. What is more, their cutting
edges were quickly blunted. As a result, they were ideal as weapons or
ornaments for the minority who controlled the wealth, but much less useful as
tools with which the mass of people could work. So even the workers on the
pyramids, tombs and temples often used stone tools a millennium and a half
after the urban revolution, and copper and bronze implements seem to have
been little used by cultivators.
Iron ore was very much more abundant than copper. Turning it into metal
required more elaborate processes. But once smiths knew how to do so, they
could turn out knives, axes, arrowheads, plough tips and nails for the masses.
The effect on agriculture was massive. The iron axe enabled cultivators to
clear the thickest woodlands, the iron-tipped plough to break up the heaviest
soil. And the relative cheapness of the iron spear and iron sword weakened the
hold of the military aristocracies, allowing peasant infantry to cut down knights
in bronze armour.
By the 7th century BC new civilisations based on the new techniques were
on the ascendant. The Assyrian Empire stretched from the Nile to eastern
Mesopotamia, welding an unprecedented number and diversity of peoples into
a single civilisation, with a single script for the different languages. A new
civilisation began to develop in northern India, with the regrowth of trade and
the building of cities after a lapse of nearly 1,000 years. A handful of kingdoms
began to emerge in northern China out of the chaotic warfare of 170 rival
statelets. And around the Mediterranean—in Palestine, Lebanon, Asia Minor,
Greece, Italy and north Africa—city states grew up free of the extreme
political and ideological centralisation of the old Mesopotamian and Egyptian
empires.
New productive techniques were matched by scientific advance and
ideological ferment. There had been a growth in certain areas of scientific
learning, especially mathematics and astronomy, in Bronze Age Mesopotamia
and Egypt. But these advances were based on the persistence of priesthoods
which, over two millennia, were increasingly cut off from material life, their
findings embedded in complex and abstruse religious systems. Renewed
advance depended on breaking with these. It came, not in the centres of the old
civilisations—the Mesopotamian cities of Ashur and Babylon or the Egyptian
cities of Memphis or Thebes—but in the new cities of northern India, northern
China and the Mediterranean coast.
The new and reinvigorated civilisations shared certain common features as
well as the use of iron. They saw a proliferation of new crafts; a growth of
long distance trade; a rise in the importance of merchants as a social class; the
use of coins to make it easy even for lowly cultivators and artisans to trade
with each other; the adoption (except in China) of new, more or less
phonetically based, alphabets which made literacy possible for much wider
numbers of people; and the rise of ‘universalistic’ religions based on
adherence to a dominant god, principle of life or code of conduct. Finally, all
the new civilisations were, like the old, based on class divisions. There was
no other way of pumping a surplus out of cultivators who were often hungry.
But there were considerable differences between the civilisations. Material
factors—environment, climate, the pool of already domesticated species,
geographical location—affected how people made a livelihood and how the
rulers took control of the surplus. These, in turn, influenced everything else that
happened.
Chapter 2
Ancient India
The ‘Aryan’ invaders who destroyed the Indus civilisation in around 1500 BC
were originally nomadic herders, living on milk and meat and led by warrior
chieftains. They had no use for the ancient cities, which they ransacked and
then abandoned. Neither did they have any use for the written word, and the
script used by the old civilisation died out.
At this stage they practised a ‘Vedic’ religion, which reflected their way of
life. Its rituals centred on the sacrifice of animals, including cattle, and its
mythology, conveyed in long sagas memorised by ‘Brahman’ priests, told of the
exploits of warrior gods. The mythology also came to embody a doctrine
which justified the bulk of the surplus going to the warrior rulers and priests on
the grounds that these were ‘twice born’ groups, innately superior to other
people. But the fully fledged system of classical Hinduism, with its four
hereditary castes, did not crystallise until there was a change in way people
gained a livelihood and, with it, a transformation of the Vedic religion into a
rather different set of practices and beliefs.
The slow spread of iron technology from about 1000 BC initiated the
change in the way of life. The iron axe made it possible to begin to clear and
cultivate the previously jungle-ridden Ganges region, providing the warrior
rulers and their priestly helpers with a much larger surplus. These groups
encouraged the spread of agriculture, but also insisted that the cultivators
deliver to them a portion, perhaps a third or even half, of each village’s crop
as tribute. Compliance with their demands was brought about by force, and
backed the religious designation of the ordinary ‘Aryans’ as a lower caste of
vaisyas (cultivators) and conquered peoples as a bottom caste of sudras
(toilers). Caste arose out of a class organisation of production in the villages
(although one not based on private property), and its persistence over
millennia was rooted in this.
But, even as class in the countryside was giving rise to the notion of a
simple division of humanity into four castes, further changes in the ways
people made a livelihood were complicating the issue. The very success of the
new agricultural methods in providing a growing surplus for the rulers also led
to the growth of non-village based social groups. The rulers wanted new
luxury goods and better armaments, and encouraged crafts like carpentry, metal
smelting, spinning, weaving and dyeing. There was a spread of trade across the
subcontinent and beyond. As with the earlier urban revolutions, clusters of
artisans and traders began to settle around the temples and military camps and
along trade routes, until some villages had grown into towns and some towns
into cities. Some of the warrior leaders were able to carve out kingdoms for
themselves. By the 6th century BC, 16 major states dominated northern India;
one, Magadha,2 had swallowed up the others by 321 BC to form an empire
across most of northern India east of the river Indus (bordering the Greek
Empire established by Alexander the Great, which ruled the lands west of the
river).
The rise of this ‘Maurya’ Indian empire gave a further boost to urban
development. It secured land trade routes to Iran and Mesopotamia in one
direction and to the kingdoms of northern China in the other. Sea routes
connected it to Arabia, Egypt, east Africa and South East Asia. It was a key
link in an emerging world (or at least ‘old world’) trade system. A Greek
emissary believed the Magadhan capital, Pataliputra, to be the most impressive
city in the known world. He estimated the Magadhan army to consist of 6,000
elephants, 80,000 cavalry and 200,000 infantry.3 The figures are undoubtedly
an exaggeration. But the fact that he believed them gives some idea of the scale
and splendour of the empire.
The Maurya monarchy obtained the enormous surplus this required by ‘an
unprecedented expansion of economic activity by the state’, with ‘state control
of agriculture, industry and trade’, and monopolies in mining and in the salt,
liquor and mineral trades. It was in a position to equip soldiers with metal
weapons and to provide tools and implements for agriculture and industry. Its
taxes financed a huge standing army and ‘a vast, numerous bureaucracy’,
reaching right down to the village level, with groups of villages having ‘an
accountant, who maintained boundaries, registered land…and kept a census of
the population and a record of the livestock’, and a ‘tax collector who was
concerned with each type of revenue…Providing further support for the whole
structure was an elaborate system of spies’.4
The Maurya state was not, in its early years, purely parasitic, and
undertook some measures which were positive for society as a whole. It used
some of the huge surplus for ‘the development of the rural economy’—founding
new settlements, encouraging sudras to settle as farmers with land granted by
the state,5 organising irrigation projects and controlling the distribution of
water. It discouraged the emergence of private property in land and banned its
sale in an effort to prevent local notables hogging the surplus produced in these
new settlements.
The spread of settled agriculture, the rise of trade and cities, and the
emergence of powerful states brought enormous changes in people’s lives and,
of necessity, in their attitudes to the world around them and to each other. The
old gods had proclaimed, in spiritual terms, the merits of herding and fighting.
New ones now began to arise who stressed the virtues of cultivation. There
was also a changing attitude to a central resource of both the old and the new
way of making a livelihood—cattle.
Previously, people had valued cattle as a source of meat. Now they were
the only motive power for ploughing heavy land and had to be protected. Even
if a peasant family was starving, it had to be prevented from killing the only
means of cultivating the next year’s crop, and of providing the warriors and the
priests with an adequate income. Out of this need emerged, after a period of
religious turmoil, the seemingly irrational veneration of the cow and the ban on
cattle slaughter which characterises modern Hinduism.
The development of urban life added to the religious flux. The new
occupational groups of artisans and traders were very often hereditary groups,
if only because the easiest way to learn complicated techniques was to study
them from an early age in the family home. The knowledge of each craft or
trade was embodied in customary lore which was tied in with its own rituals
and presided over by its own gods. The religion of the Brahmans could only
dominate the mindset of all the craft and trade groups if it found a place for
these gods and, similarly, fitted the practitioners of the new skills into the
increasingly rigid and hereditary four-caste system of warriors, priests,
cultivators and toilers.
A revolution in social behaviour necessitated a revolution in religious
doctrine and practices. As people from different social groups tried to come to
terms with the contradictions between new realities and old beliefs, they did
so in different ways. Scores of sects arose in 6th century north India, each
rearranging elements of the traditional beliefs into its own particular pattern,
often clashing bitterly with each other and with the established Brahman
priests. Out of these emerged religions that survive to the present day.
The best known of these sects were to be the Jain followers of Mahavira
and the Buddhist followers of Gautama. They had certain points in common.
They opposed blood sacrifices and animal slaughter. They counterposed
ahimsa (non-killing) to warfare. They rejected caste distinctions—their
founders were not Brahmans. They tended to stress the need for a rational
understanding of events and processes, in some cases dispensing with the old
tales of godly adventures and exploits to such an extent as to border on
materialism and atheism.
Such doctrines fitted the society which was emerging. They protected its
supply of draught animals and expressed the distaste of the cultivators, artisans
and merchants at the wanton destruction of war. They appealed to the
resentment of economically thriving members of these social groups at being
discriminated against by the increasingly trenchant caste rules of the Brahmans.
They also appealed to some of the rulers (the emperor Ashoka, 264-227 BC,
even converted to Buddhism, supposedly through remorse at the carnage of his
greatest military victory). The repudiation of caste distinctions could aid
monarchs in their struggle to stop the upper castes in each locality diverting the
surplus into their own pockets. It could gain backing from the new social
groups of the towns for the empire. Even the doctrine of non-violence could
help an already successful conqueror maintain internal peace against possible
challengers. A ‘universalist’ system of beliefs suited a ‘universal’ monarchy.
The empire did not last long, falling apart soon after Ashoka’s death. The
huge army and bureaucratic apparatus put too much strain on the empire’s
resources. Communications were still too primitive for any emperor to curb
the power of local notables indefinitely. But this time the disintegration of the
empire did not bring the collapse of civilisation. Agriculture and trade
continued to expand. Roman coins circulated in south India and ships carried
goods to and from the Roman world, Ethiopia, Malaya and south east Asia.
Indian merchants were ‘the entrepreneurs in the trade supplying the luxury
foods of the Graeco-Roman world’.6 The artisan crafts flourished. ‘Cloth
making, silk weaving and the making of arms and luxury items seems to have
made progress’, and ‘perhaps in no other period had a money economy
penetrated so deeply into the life of the common people in the towns and
suburbs’.7 Such economic expansion made possible the formation of another,
less centralised, empire, that of the Guptas, half a millennium after the collapse
of the first.
Patronage of learning and the arts now came from merchants and their
guilds as well as from royalty. Their donations financed magnificent religious
monuments, immaculate cave carvings and Buddhist monasteries. There was an
exchange not merely of goods, but also of ideas with the Graeco-Roman world.
Philosophers on the Ganges would have some knowledge of debates in Athens
and Alexandria, and vice-versa. Many commentators have seen the influence of
Buddhist religious notions on early Christianity, while a version of Christianity
got a minority hearing in certain coastal Indian towns in the early centuries
AD.
Scientific inquiry flourished alongside religious mysticism. ‘The highest
intellectual achievement of the subcontinent’ was in mathematics.8 By 200 BC
‘detailed geometry’ was making possible the calculations for arcs and
segments of chords. Romano-Greek science made its influence felt in southern
India, but mathematicians went beyond ‘Ptolemy’s method of reckoning in
terms of chords of circles’ to ‘reckoning in sines, thereby initiating the study of
trigonometry’.9 This was followed by the perfection of the decimal system, the
solution of certain indeterminate equations, an accurate calculation of the value
of π by Aryabhata, and, by the 7th century AD at the latest, the use of zero,
something unknown to the Greeks and Romans.
Just as there was the beginning of a world system in trade, there was also
the beginning of a world system in ideas. The Hindu religion spread with the
clearances of the forests to south India, and then to the Malay peninsula and
Cambodia. Merchants carried their Buddhism with them to the island of
Ceylon, through the Himalayas to Tibet, along the trade routes to China and
eventually to Korea and Japan. Meanwhile, advances in mathematics in India
became part of the foundation of Arab learning, which in turn was essential to
the European ‘Renaissance’ 1,000 years later.
Yet in India itself there was a loss of cultural momentum from the 6th
century onwards. The subcontinent fragmented into warring states, while
successive invaders caused devastation in the north west. The material base of
society, the means by which people could obtain a livelihood, was simply not
advanced enough to sustain enormous and expensive imperial superstructures.
The successor monarchs found it increasingly difficult to preserve their realms,
keep internal peace, maintain roads and provide security for traders. There
was a decline in the level of trade, in the wealth of the merchants and in
Buddhist influence. Some of the great monasteries survived, but were
increasingly cut off from the wider society which had given rise to them, until
their impact in distant China was greater than in the various Indian kingdoms.
There was what has been called a ‘feudalisation’ of society—a growing
fragmentation into almost self contained village economies. This occurred as
kings found no way to pay officials except with a share of the surplus extracted
from local cultivators and made land grants to those, usually Brahmans, who
supervised the clearing and tilling of forest areas. Most craftspeople found
they could only survive by practising their skills in the villages for a direct
share of the local produce. Production for local use increasingly replaced
production for the market.
There was still some growth of output as agriculture spread to new areas,
and even a slow but significant advance in agricultural methods. But this took
place within a framework increasingly under the influence of the Brahmans,
since they alone had a network of people based in every village. Culture was
increasingly their culture and this, as Romila Thapar has noted, ‘led to
intellectual constriction’, as ‘formal education’ became ‘entirely scholastic’.10
The Brahmans had adopted elements from Buddhism—in particular, they
had taken up vegetarianism as a sign of their own holiness and banned the
eating of beef completely. But they strengthened their old stress on caste
distinctions, slotting each occupational and tribal group into its own place in
an elaborate and supposedly unchanging hierarchy. Tribal outsiders to the
cultivator communities became ‘outcasts’—groups forced to live in degrading
conditions on the outskirts of villages, confined to the most lowly and unclean
occupations, their mere touch a source of pollution to the high castes.
What had been a region of rapid change and intellectual ferment for
centuries became characterised, for close to 1,000 years, by inward looking
villages, religious superstition, and fragmented, warring, parasitic kingdoms.
One product was the fully formed system of a multitude of castes encountered
by Muslim and European conquerors in the next millennium.
Chapter 3
The first Chinese empires
European historians have traditionally seen world history as starting in the
Middle East and then passing through Greece and Rome to Western Europe.
But a civilisation emerged in northern China which surpassed any in Europe,
survived in one form or another for over 2,000 years and was responsible for
some of humanity’s most important technical advances.
The Ch’in Empire, founded in 221 BC, ruled over more people than the
Romans ever did. It had 6,800 kilometres of roads (compared with the 5,984
kilometres of the Roman Empire), built to common design so as to cope with
chariots and carts of standard axle width. It was able to put an estimated
300,000 people to work on the 3,000 kilometres of the first Great Wall,11 and
up to 700,000 on constructing the first emperor’s tomb, with its ‘army’ of life-
size terracotta soldiers. Canals linked the great rivers, creating an internal
waterway system without parallel anywhere in the world.
The empire was the culmination of centuries of economic and social
change. Some people had turned to agriculture at about the same time as in
Mesopotamia, growing millet and domesticating pigs and dogs in the north,
learning the very different techniques required to grow rice and domesticate
buffalo in the Yangtze River valley further south.
Cities and states arose after 2000 BC built by people using neolithic
techniques. By the end of the 17th century BC metal workers had learnt to
combine tin and lead with copper to produce bronze, and aristocratic warriors
were using weapons made from it to carve out a kingdom for the Shang
Dynasty on the Yellow River in northern China. It seems to have been
dominated by an aristocracy that combined military, priestly and administrative
roles. It was a class society, practising the sacrifice of servants at royal
funerals, but private property does not seem to have developed at this stage.12
Under the Chou Dynasty, from the 11th century BC, kings delegated much of
their power to 100 or so local rulers in a system often described as ‘feudalism’
(making parallels with Medieval Europe),13 although some historians claim
what existed was a version of Marx’s ‘Asiatic society’, not feudalism, since
texts relate that the organisation of agriculture was not based on individual
peasant plots. Rather, administrative direction regulated ‘common peasants in
their daily life’—not just their work, but also their ‘marriages, festivals and
assemblies’.14 The peasant was told each year what crop to plant, when to sow
and when to harvest. He could be ordered to leave his winter home for the
fields, or to leave the fields and shut himself up in his home.15 In any case, the
history of the Chou Dynasty was one of almost incessant warfare between the
rival lords.
Over the centuries, the multitude of mini-states coalesced into a handful of
large ones as technical change made it possible to wage war more effectively.
The number of chariots increased, there were new techniques of siege warfare,
and the sword and crossbow enabled conscripted peasant footsoldiers to stand
firm against charioteers for the first time. Such warfare, in turn, provided
rulers with an incentive to pursue further technical advance. During the 4th and
3rd centuries BC (known as ‘the age of the warring states’) these rulers
initiated the clearing of the northern plain and river valleys, the draining of
marshy regions and the spread of irrigation, often on a massive scale. An iron
industry also grew up, organised on a scale unmatched anywhere else at the
time, with the large scale production from moulds of cast iron tools and
weapons—not just swords and knives, but ‘spades, hoes, sickles, ploughs,
axes, and chisels’.16
New agricultural methods increased output: intensive farming based upon
deep ploughing with oxen; the use of animal dung and human ‘night soil’ as
fertiliser; the cultivation of wheat and soya beans as well as millet; the
planting of leguminous crops to restore the fertility of the land; and an
increased understanding of the best times for sowing.17 The surplus grew ever
larger.
Jacques Gernet notes, ‘The age of the warring states is one of the richest
known to history in technical innovations’, with the ‘development of a
considerable trade in ordinary consumer goods (cloth, cereals, salt) and in
metals, wood, leather and hides. The richest merchants combined such
commerce with big industrial enterprises (iron mills and foundries, in
particular), employed increasing numbers of workmen and commercial agents,
and controlled whole fleets of river boats and large numbers of carts…The big
merchant entrepreneurs were the social group whose activities made the
biggest contribution to the enrichment of the state…The capitals of kingdoms…
tended to become big commercial and manufacturing centres…The object of
the wars of the 3rd century was often the conquest of these big commercial
centres’.18
But rulers could only successfully embrace the new methods if they broke
the power of the old aristocracy. ‘Parallel with technological change in
agriculture…were socio-economic changes’ and ‘political reforms in several
states’.19
The Ch’in state could eventually conquer the others because it
implemented these changes most systematically. It relied on a new central
administrative class of warriors and officials to crush the old aristocracy.
These gave the key role in cultivation to the individual peasant nuclear family,
allowing it to own the land, pay taxes and contribute labour directly to the state
rather than to the local lord. ‘It was the new productive force of the small
farmers that supported the new regime’.20
This was a social revolution, the replacement of one exploiting class by
another, from above. It was a revolution carried through by armies, which
exacted an enormous toll. One classic account claimed, probably
exaggeratedly, that there were 1,489,000 deaths during 150 years of war from
364 to 234 BC.21 The last few years of pre-imperial China were ‘a
monotonous recital of military campaigns and victories’, with one victory
allegedly involving the beheading of 100,000 men.22 The establishment of the
empire was accompanied by the deportation of no fewer than 120,000 of the
old ‘rich and powerful’ families.23
The transformation was not just the result of the initiative of a few rulers
deploying powerful armies. The changes in technology and agriculture had set
in motion forces which the rulers could not control and often did not want.
As the surplus produced by the peasants grew, so did the demand of the
rulers, old and new, for luxury goods, metal weapons, horses, chariots, bows
and armour for their armies. The peasants needed a constant supply of tools.
All these goods could only by supplied by ever greater numbers of craft
workers, operating with new techniques of their own, and of merchant traders
operating between, as well as within, the individual states. Standardised metal
weights and then coins circulated, further encouraging people to trade.
The influence of the merchants was demonstrated when the richest of them
became chancellor to the future emperor in 250 BC, was granted land
comprising 100,000 households and surrounded himself with an entourage of
3,000 scholars.24
Cho-yun Hsu goes so far as to suggest, ‘In the years of turmoil from the 5th
to the 3rd century BC, there was the strong possibility of developing a
predominantly urban-centred social life rather than a rural based agrarian
economy. Large and prosperous market centres flourished and the urban
mentality of profit making…predominated’.25
The German-American historian of China, Karl Wittfogel, argued, while
still a Marxist in the 1930s, that there were similarities between China in this
period and Europe during the later stages of feudalism almost 2,000 years
later.26 China could have been transformed by the merchant ‘bourgeoisie’ into a
new society based overwhelmingly on production by wage labourers for the
market. Instead, it fell under the dominance of the bureaucracy of the state,
which succeeded in channelling the surplus away from both the merchants and
the old aristocracy and concentrating it in its own hands. The merchants
supported the state in its struggle against the aristocracy, only to see
themselves robbed of the fruits of victory by the state bureaucracy.
Certainly, the state repeatedly attacked the merchants under both the Ch’in
Dynasty and its successor, Han (from 206 BC to AD 220). The first Han
emperor, for instance, ‘forbade merchants to wear silk and ride in carriages…
Neither merchants nor their children and grandchildren were allowed to serve
in the government’.27 The state took control of two of the key industries, salt
and iron, to ensure, as a Han document tells, ‘the various profits of salt and
iron are monopolised [by the empire] in order to suppress rich traders and rich
merchants’.28 Higher taxes were levied on trading profits than on agriculture,
and the wealth of merchants who tried to evade the taxes was confiscated.
During the 54 year rule of the emperor Wu (141-87 BC) ‘the merchants’
properties were forcibly seized by the imperial power. In order to survive the
merchants often had to establish ties with the bureaucrats or even the court’.29
Often protection of the peasants was the hypocritical excuse for such
attacks. Document after document from the period complained that commerce
and industry were ruining the peasantry, causing repeated famines and rural
unrest and, at the same time, providing merchants with the means to threaten the
state. This in turn, created dangers from an impoverished class. According to
the emperor Wang Mang in AD 9, ‘The rich, being haughty, acted evilly; the
poor, being poverty stricken, acted wickedly’.30
The centuries in which these different exploiting classes jostled with each
other for influence were necessarily also centuries of intellectual ferment. The
members of different classes tended to see the world in different ways. Rival
philosophical and religious schools emerged as different social groups
attempted to come to terms with the changes taking place around them.
Confucius (born in the 6th century BC) and his 4th century BC follower
Mencius advocated a respect for tradition and ritual combined with honesty
and self control. In subsequent centuries this was to become the conservative
ideology of the supposedly enlightened administrators, who kept society
running on traditional lines while living a very comfortable life. In Mencius’s
time it did, however, imply a repudiation of the methods of greedy princes. The
repudiation went even further in the case of Motzu, who lived some 60 years
after Confucius. He established a sect which sought to establish, by
authoritarian means, an egalitarianism based on common frugality, opposed to
selfishness, luxury and war. By contrast, the current later to be called Taoism
preached that individual salvation lay not in collective action, but in learning
techniques which helped the individual to withdraw from the world and master
it. Versions of Confucianism and Taoism were to vie with Buddhism for
people’s minds through much of later Chinese history, while egalitarian sects
were repeatedly to emerge to express the bitterness of the poor.
But the immediate victor in the ideological battles of the last centuries BC
was a different current, usually called ‘legalism’. This laid the central stress
on the strength and bureaucratic functioning of the state itself. It insisted that the
state’s officials should only be concerned with fulfilling its laws, without
being sidetracked by concerns with personal virtue preached by the followers
of Confucius and Mencius.
Legalism justified the role of the administrators as the embodiment of the
general good. It also fitted in with the merchants’ stress on rational calculation
and fear of arbitrary political decisions, which would disturb their money
making. Its maxims were popularised, for instance in hymns for the masses
which portrayed the administrator and the state’s edicts as the essential
safeguard for society as a whole.
The rulers did not depend simply on intellectual persuasion to win
acceptance of their totalitarian view of the world. They also did their best to
ensure people were not presented with any alternative. The first emperor
decreed the burning of all books which referred to the old traditions: ‘There
are some men of letters who do not model themselves on the present, but study
the past in order to criticise the present age. They confuse and excite the
people…It is expedient that these be prohibited.’ People who dared to discuss
the banned books ‘should suffer execution, with public exposure of their
corpses; those who use the past to criticise the present should be put to death
together with their relatives’.31
At first, the increased power of the state did not prevent continued advance
in trade and artisan production—indeed, they benefited from government
measures such as the building of roads and canals, and the extension of the
empire into south China, central Asia, Indochina and the Korean peninsula.
There were further important technological advances: steel was being
produced by the 2nd century AD (a millennium and half before it appeared in
Europe); the world’s first water-wheels were in operation; and the
wheelbarrow, which enabled people to move more than twice their own
weight, was in use by the 3rd century AD (1,000 years before its arrival in
western Europe).
But the independence of the merchants-entrepreneurs as a class was
curtailed. They were unable to establish themselves as a force with their own
centres of power, as they were in the cities of late Medieval Europe. Instead,
they were increasingly dependent on the state bureaucracy.
The peasants’ lot scarcely improved after the measures taken against the
merchant class. Taxes to the state ensured they lived scarcely above the
breadline when harvests were good and fell below it, into famine, when they
were not. At all times life consisted of almost endless drudgery. The soil of the
north China plain demanded continual attention between planting and
harvesting if it was not to dry out or become infested with weeds or insects.32
Yet between a third and a half of the produce passed straight into other hands.
It should never be forgotten that all the ‘wonders’ of the empire—the Great
Wall, the canals, the emperors’ tombs, the palaces—involved millions of hours
of labour and were of decreasing benefit to society as a whole. After the first
emperor heard from a magician that he could achieve immortality if he stayed
aloof from other men, ‘He ordered 270 palaces to be furnished with banners,
bells, drums and beautiful women, and to be linked by walled or roofed
roads…Anyone revealing his presence would suffer death’.33 On one
occasion, when he believed there was an informer in his entourage, he put 460
men to death.34
Such waste had to be paid for by maintaining pressure on the peasantry.
There were repeated peasant rebellions. While uprisings of the lower classes
against their rulers are rarely mentioned in the records of ancient
Mesopotamia, Egypt, India or Rome, they occur again and again in the case of
China.
One such uprising had precipitated the collapse of the Ch’in Dynasty. The
story goes that the rebellion was started by a former hired labourer, Chen
Sh’eng, who was leading 900 convicts to a prison settlement. Fearing
punishment for being late, he reasoned, ‘Flight means death and plotting also
means death…Death for trying to establish a state is preferable.’ The rebellion
‘led to widespread killings’,35 a wave of panic at the imperial court, the
execution of the emperor’s main former adviser and, eventually, the
assassination of the emperor. After four years of turmoil one of the rebel
leaders marched on the capital and seized the throne, establishing a new
dynasty, the Han.
The masses had played a key role in the uprising. But they did not benefit
from its outcome. The new empire was scarcely different to the old. It was not
long before it, in turn, faced risings. In AD 17 peasants hit by floods in the
lower valley of the Yellow River rose up behind leaders such as a woman
skilled in witchcraft called ‘Mother Lu’. They were known as the ‘red
eyebrows’, because they painted their faces, and they set up independent
kingdoms under their leaders in two regions.
Such rebellions set a pattern which was to recur repeatedly. The extortions
of the imperial tax system and the landowners would drive the peasants to
rebel. Revolts would conquer whole provinces, complete with provincial
capitals, and even threaten the imperial capital, until they were joined by
generals from the imperial army, government officials who had fallen out with
the court, and certain landowners. Yet successful revolts led to new emperors
or new dynasties which treated the mass of peasants just as badly as those they
had replaced.
This was not just a matter of the corruptibility of individual leaders. The
peasants could not establish a permanent, centralised organisation capable of
imposing their own goals on society. Their livelihood came from farming their
individual plots and they could not afford to leave them for more than a short
period of time. Those who did so became non-peasants, dependent upon
pillage or bribes for their survival, open to influence from whoever would pay
them. Those who stayed on their land might dream of a better world, without
toil, hardship and famine. But they depended on the state administrators when
it came to irrigation and flood control, the provision of iron tools, and access
to goods which they could not grow themselves. They could conceive of a
world in which the administrators behaved better and the landowners did not
squeeze them. But they could not conceive of a completely different society run
by themselves.
However, the rebellions did have the cumulative effect of weakening the
Han Empire. It lasted as long as the whole of the modern era in western
Europe. But it had increasing difficulty controlling the big landowners in each
region. The imperial administration had no way of raising the resources to
sustain itself and its empire other than by squeezing the peasants. It could not
prevent periodic revolts. In AD 184 a messianic movement, the Yellow
Turbans, headed by the leader of a Taoist sect, organised some 360,000 armed
supporters. Generals sent to put down the rebellions were soon fighting each
other, adding to the chaos and devastation.
Amid the burning down of the capital, the pillaging of whole areas of the
country and the disruption of trade routes there was sharp decline in the urban
centres, which further disrupted life in the countryside. Rival landowners were
soon dominant in each locality, taking political and economic power into their
own hands as they ran estates, took over the organisation of peasant labour to
maintain canals, dams and irrigation works, and began to collect the taxes that
had previously gone, at least in theory, to the state.36 The cultivators continued
to produce crops under the new economic arrangements and many of the crafts
and industries persisted—although, directed to satisfy purely local demands,
they could hardly flourish. A long period of technological advance came to an
end and so too, for the next three centuries, did the Chinese Empire, replaced
by a proliferation of rival kingdoms.
In some ways the period has similarities to what happened in India in the
5th century AD and to the collapse of the western Roman Empire at about the
same time. But there was an important difference. The essential continuity of
Chinese civilisation was not broken and the ground was laid for a much more
rapid revival of the economy and urban life than was to occur in India or
Rome.
Nevertheless, the very political structures that had once done so much to
promote technological advance and economic expansion could now no longer
do so, resulting in a partial breakdown of the old society. The old bureaucratic
ruling class could not keep society going in the old way. The landed
aristocracy could only oversee its fragmentation. The merchants were
unwilling to break with the other privileged classes and put forward a
programme of social transformation capable of drawing behind it the
rebellious peasants, adopting instead the quietist Buddhist religion from India.
There was not mutual destruction of the contending classes, but there was
certainly mutual paralysis.
Chapter 4
The Greek city states
The third great civilisation to flourish 2,500 years ago was that of ancient
Greece. Alexander the Great carved out an empire which very briefly stretched
from the Balkans and the Nile to the Indus in the late 4th century BC at the very
time that Magadha’s rulers began to dominate the Indian subcontinent and
Ch’in’s to build a new empire in China. Notions which arose in Athens and
developed in Greek Alexandria were to exercise the same sort of influence
over Mediterranean and European thinking for the next two millennia as ideas
developed in Magadha in India and by Confucius and Mencius in China.
Yet there was little to distinguish the peoples living on the islands and in
the coastal villages of Greece in the 9th century BC from the cultivators
anywhere else in Eurasia or Africa. The Mycenaean past was all but forgotten,
except perhaps for a few myths, and its fortress palaces had been allowed to
fall apart. The villages were cut off from each other and from the civilisations
of mainland Asia and Egypt. The people were illiterate, craft specialisation
was rudimentary, figurative art was virtually non-existent, life was harsh and
famines frequent.37
The forces at work fusing these people into a new civilisation were
similar to those in north India and north China—the slow but steady spread of
knowledge of iron working, the discovery of new techniques in agriculture, the
growth of trade, the rediscovery of old craft skills and the learning of new
ones, and the elaboration of alphabets. From the 7th century BC there was
steady economic growth and ‘a marked rise in the standard of living of
practically all sections of the population’.38 By the 6th century BC these
changes had given rise to city states capable of creating magnificent edifices
like the Acropolis in Athens and, by their joint efforts, of defeating invasion
attempts by the huge army of Persia. But the circumstances in which the
economic and social changes took place were different in two important
respects from those in China and, to a lesser extent, India.
The Greek coastal settlements soon had more direct contact with other
civilisations than was the case in China and India. Phoenician sailors had
traded along the Mediterranean coasts for centuries, bringing with them
knowledge of the technical advances achieved in the Mesopotamian and
Egyptian empires. Then, from the 6th century BC, there was direct and
continual intercourse between the Greek cities and the successive empires of
the Middle East through trade, the employment of Greek mercenaries in
imperial armies and the residence of Greek exiles in the imperial cities. Such
contacts gave an important boost to the development of Greek civilisation. For
instance, the Greek alphabet developed directly out of the Semitic script used
by the Phoenicians.
The Chinese and Indian civilisations flourished in fertile river valleys and
on broad plains, where agriculture could be highly productive once the forests
were cleared. By contrast, the expansion of Greek agriculture was limited by
the mountainous terrain. A surplus was obtained by the use of new techniques
from the early 8th century BC. But beyond a certain point this would have
begun to dry up if different responses had not been adopted from those in India
and China.
The shortage of land encouraged the cultivators to take to the seas and
colonise fertile coastal areas further along the Mediterranean—on Aegean and
Ionian islands, around the Black Sea and Asia Minor, in southern Italy and
Sicily, even along the coasts of Spain and southern France. The expansion of
trade which accompanied this colonisation in turn encouraged the development
of the crafts at home—so that Athenian pottery, for example, was soon to be
found throughout the Mediterranean region. What had begun as isolated
communities of cultivators and fishermen had turned by the 6th century BC into
a network of city states, which fought each other but which were also bound
together by trade and, with it, by a common alphabet, mutually intelligible
dialects, similar religious practices and joint festivals, of which the Olympic
Games is the best known.
The relative unproductiveness of the land had one other very important
side effect. The surplus output that could be obtained after feeding a peasant
family and its children was quite small. But it could be increased considerably
by working the land—and later the mines and large craft establishments—with
a labour force of childless adults. The enslavement of war captives provided
precisely such a labour force.39 Here was a cheap way of getting hold of other
humans to exploit—the cost of a slave in late 5th century BC Athens was less
than half the wage paid to a free artisan for a year’s work.40
Slavery had existed for a very long time in the old civilisations. But it was
marginal to surplus production, with the slaves concentrated on providing
personal services to the rulers while agriculture and the crafts were left to
semi-free citizens. Now, in Greece—and soon on a much greater scale in
Rome—slavery became a major source of the surplus.
Significantly, the one major Greek city state which did rely upon the
exploitation of a serf-like peasantry, Sparta, was centred on a relatively fertile
inland area.41 Here a ruling class of full citizens who took no part in
agriculture or artisan labour lived off the tribute delivered to them by the
‘Helot’ cultivators. But here, too, was a ruling class which boasted of its
austere mode of life, indicating an awareness of the limitations on its way of
obtaining the surplus.42 The exception seems to prove the rule for the other
Greek states.
It is sometimes argued that slavery could not have been central to these
states because slaves did not constitute anything like a majority of the
population.43 But as G E M De Ste Croix has pointed out in his marvellous
study, Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World, their proportion in the
population and even the contribution of their labour to the overall social
product is not the issue. What matters is how important they were to producing
the surplus, for without this there could be no life of idleness for the ruling
class, no freeing of writers and poets from relentless physical toil and no
resources for marvels like the Acropolis. The ruling class owed its position to
the control of land cultivated mainly by slaves, to such an extent that the classic
Greek writers and philosophers saw the ownership of slaves as essential to a
civilised life. So Aristotle could lump the master and slave as the essential
elements of the household alongside the husband and wife, father and children,
while Polybus speaks of slaves and cattle as the essential requirements of
life.44
Slave revolts do not punctuate the history of Greece in the same way that
peasant revolts occur in the history of China. This is because the character of
Greek, and later Roman, slavery made it very difficult for the slaves to
organise against their exploiters. They were overwhelmingly captives from
wars waged across the Mediterranean, the Balkans, Asia Minor and even
southern Russia.45 They were deliberately mixed together in the slave markets
so that those living and working next to each other, coming from different
cultures and speaking different languages, could only communicate with
difficulty through the Greek dialect of their masters. And the master could
usually rely on other Greeks to help punish rebellious slaves and hunt
escapees. So while the Spartans’ Helot serfs in Messenia could organise
together, eventually rising up and liberating themselves, the slaves proper
could not. For most of the time, opposition to their exploitation could only take
the form of passive resentment. This resentment was itself an important factor
in Greek and, later, Roman history. It meant the direct producers had very little
interest in improving their techniques or the quality of their output, and it
discouraged improvements in labour productivity. Furthermore, the need to
keep the slaves in their place formed the background to whatever other
decisions politicians or rulers might make. But the slaves were rarely in a
position to intervene in the historical process on their own behalf.
However, a different class struggle did play a central role in the history of
classical Greece. This was the struggle between the rich landowners, who
farmed their land with relatively large numbers of slaves while keeping well
clear of anything approaching manual labour themselves, and the mass of
smaller farmers and artisans. These might sometimes own one or two slaves,
but would work beside them on the land or in the workshops.
When the Greek city states first emerged they still displayed the imprint of
their past. Kings came from lines of traditional chieftains, and the kinship
lineages played an important role in determining people’s obligations and
behaviour toward each other. Society was still held together by customary
notions about rights and obligations rather than by formal codes of law. Those
landowners who grew rich from the expansion of trade and the growth of
slavery increasingly challenged such patterns of behaviour. They resented the
privileges of the old ruling families on the one hand and their traditional
obligations to the poor on the other. This was ‘a world of bitter conflicts
among the elite…played out at every opportunity, disputing boundaries,
disputing inheritance, putting up competitive displays at funerals’.46
The outcome in many states was the overthrow of the kings and the
establishment of ‘oligarchies’—republics ruled by the wealthy. In these the
new rich used their position not only to displace the old rulers, but also to
squeeze as much surplus as possible out of those below them.
They taxed those with smaller landholdings to pay for state expenditures—
for instance, on the navy—that were in their own interests. Relatively frequent
harvest failures meant that many peasants could only pay these taxes and keep
themselves alive by getting into debt to the rich, who would eventually use this
as a justification for seizing their land and often even their very persons as
‘bond slaves’. Courts manned by the oligarchs were only too happy to give
judgements against the poor.
The oligarchic republics were soon shaken by the resulting bitterness of
wide sections of their citizens. In many of them ambitious men, usually
themselves from the upper class, were able to exploit the bitterness to take
political power into their own hands as ‘tyrants’. They would then upset the
rich by dealing out various reforms to help the mass of people. But they would
not and could not end the division into classes.
In some states, most notably Athens, the pressure from below resulted in
even more radical changes—the replacement of both oligarchy and tyranny by
‘democracy’. The word, taken literally, means ‘rule of the people’. In reality it
never referred to the whole people, since it excluded slaves, women and
resident non-citizens—the metics, who often accounted for a large proportion
of the traders and craftsmen. It did not challenge the concentration of property
—and slaves—in the hands of the rich, either. This was hardly surprising,
since the leadership of the ‘democratic’ forces usually lay in the hands of
dissident wealthy landowners, who advanced their own political positions by
taking up some of the demands of the masses. But it did give the poorer citizens
the power to protect themselves from the extortions of the rich.
So in Athens debt-slavery was banned from the time of Solon (594 BC)
onwards, law-making power was invested in an assembly open to all the
citizens, and judges and lower officials were chosen by lot.
Such restraints on its power caused immense resentment among the upper
class—a resentment which found reflection in some literary and philosophical
circles. It was claimed that democracy was the rule of the mob, that those
members of the leisured class who conceded rights to the lower classes were
unscrupulous careerists (hence the word ‘demagogue’), and that the only hope
for the future lay in breaking the shackles of popular control. Such is the tone
of the plays of Aristophanes and the political writings of Plato, and it was
probably the norm among Socrates and his followers.47
The upper classes did not simply express verbal resentment. When they
could they staged an armed seizure of power, a full counter-revolution, if
necessary murdering those who stood in their way. They were able to attempt
such things because their wealth gave them military means not open to the
ordinary citizens. The key military units were the ‘Hoplite’ section of the
infantry, which included only those citizens with landholdings large enough to
pay for the requisite armour and weapons. So the history of many Greek cities
was one of continual struggles, often successful, by the richer landowners
against democracy. The partial exception was Athens, where democracy
survived for some 200 years. This was because the city’s dependence on trade
gave a vital role to its navy, which was manned by the poorer citizens. Even
the rich, who resented democracy, usually felt compelled to placate the poorer
citizens. Two attempts to impose oligarchic rule, in the aftermath of defeat in
the Peloponnesian War with Sparta, were shortlived.
This 30 year war in the late 5th century BC had intertwined with the class
battle over democracy within many of the city states. It arose out of a struggle
between Sparta and Athens for influence over other city states. Sparta had built
an alliance of states around the Peloponnese—the southern Greek mainland—
to protect its borders and its subjection of the Helots. Athens was dependent on
its sea routes for trade and had a sea-based alliance of coastal towns and
islands, exacting regular payments of tribute from its allies which it used to
help finance state spending, especially on its navy. But the war was about more
than just which of the alliances would dominate. It also came to involve rival
conceptions of how society should be organised. In Athens and its allied states
there were many in the upper classes who at least half-welcomed Spartan
successes in the war as an excuse to overthrow democracy. For some, Sparta
became the focus of their counter-revolutionary aspirations, a model of how a
privileged minority should deprive everyone else of any rights,48 much as
fascist Italy and then Nazi Germany did for sections of the ruling class across
Europe in the 1930s.
The social upheavals and class tensions which characterised the rise of
Greek civilisation during these two or three centuries are the background to the
great achievements of Greek literature, science and philosophy. It was a period
in which people found themselves forced to question old certainties. The
power of the poetry ascribed to Homer (in reality, oral sagas written down for
the first time in about 700 BC) came from the depiction of people struggling to
come to terms with their destiny in a period of social flux. The tragic tension in
the plays of Aeschylus came from the way characters could not resolve the
clash between rival moral codes, reflecting old and new ways of ordering
society. The rival schools of classical Greek philosophy arose as thinkers
sought to find a new objective basis for arriving at truth, the goals of human
life and rules for human behaviour. ‘Sophists’ and ‘sceptics’ came to the
conclusion that all that was possible was to knock down each argument in turn.
Plato argued that the destruction of each succeeding argument by another (a
process known as ‘dialectic’) led to the conclusion that truth must depend upon
a realm outside direct human experience, accessible only to a philosophic
elite, who should run society in a totalitarian fashion. Aristotle, after studying
under Plato, reacted against this by putting the stress upon positive empirical
knowledge of the existing physical and social world, which he saw as
constituted out of four basic ‘elements’ (water, fire, air and earth). Democritus
in the 5th century BC and Epicurus at the end of the 4th century BC developed
a materialist view of the world as constituted out of indivisible atoms.
The Greek city states, unencumbered by the gross bureaucracies of the
Mesopotamian, Assyrian and Persian empires, were able to show a greater
dynamism and to command the active allegiance of a much greater proportion
of their populations when it came to war. This explains the ability of combined
Greek states to hold back invading armies early in the 5th century BC. And 150
years later it was to enable an army built by the Greek-influenced kingdom of
Macedonia in the north to establish its power briefly over not only the Greek
city states but also, under Alexander the Great, the two historic empires of
Egypt and the Middle East. Alexander’s empire fell apart after his death, but
Greek-speaking dynasties continued to reign over rival Middle Eastern and
Egyptian empires. Greek advances in science and philosophy, which had
grown out of the achievements of the old civilisations in these regions, now
made further advances within them. It was in the Greek-Egyptian city of
Alexandria that the Greek school of science, mathematics and philosophy
reached its next peak. Around 300 BC Euclid formulated the basic theorems of
geometry. Soon afterwards Eratosthenes calculated the diameter of the Earth as
24,000 miles. Around 150 BC Hypharcus began to work out trigonometric
means of calcuating distances, and arrived at a relatively accurate result for the
distance of the moon from the Earth. Claudius Ptolemy built on Hyparchus’s
ideas 300 years later and developed a model of motion of the planets and stars.
Although showing them as moving round the Earth, it enabled reasonably
accurate calculations to be made of their paths. Overall, Alexandrian science
and mathematics made an important contribution to further advances in India,
China and, from the 7th to the 12th centuries AD, in the Arab world. However,
its findings were virtually unknown in Europe for more than 1,000 years.
Meanwhile, the remnants of Alexander’s empire around the Mediterranean
were soon absorbed into a new empire, that built by the rulers of Rome.
Chapter 5
Rome’s rise and fall
‘The glory that was Rome’ is a refrain which finds its echo in most Western
accounts of world history. The rise of Rome is portrayed as the high point of
the ancient civilisations, its eventual decline as a historic tragedy. So one of
the great works of the European Enlightenment, Edward Gibbons’ Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire, begins, ‘In the 2nd century of the Christian era, the
empire of Rome comprehended the fairest part of the earth…The gentle but
powerful influence of laws and manners had gradually cemented the union of
the provinces. Their peaceful inhabitants enjoyed and abused the advantages of
wealth and luxury’.49
From one angle Roman civilisation was impressive. A small town in Italy
rose to rule the whole Mediterranean area—Egypt north of Aswan, all of
Europe south of the Danube and Rhine, Asia Minor and Syria, and Africa north
of the Sahara. The western part of its empire lasted some 600 years, the
eastern part 1,600. Everywhere the rulers of the empire oversaw the
construction of public buildings and temples, stadiums and aqueducts, public
baths and paved roads, leaving a legacy that was to impress subsequent
generations.
Yet the civilisation of the empire as such added very little to humanity’s
ability to make a livelihood or to our accumulated stock of scientific
knowledge or cultural endeavour. It was not characterised by innovation in the
same way as early Mesopotamia and Egypt, classical Greece or the last half
millennium BC in India and China. Ste Croix goes so far as to insist that, apart
from ‘two or three contributions in the realm of technology’, the Romans only
surpassed their Greek predecessors in two fields: first, in the practice of
ruling, of creating structures capable of holding together a great empire;
second, in the theory of ‘civil law’, concerned with the regulation of property
and inheritance (as opposed to Roman criminal law, which remained arbitrary
and oppressive).50 This is an exaggeration. Certainly, Roman engineering and
architecture is impressive, with its viaducts, amphitheatres, temples and roads.
But in most fields the main impact of the Roman Empire was to spread across
central and western Europe the earlier advances made in Egypt, Mesopotamia
and Greece. It added very little to them. What is more, the very basis on which
the empire was built ensured its eventual collapse, leaving nothing in the west
but the memory of the achievements it had borrowed from elsewhere.
The earliest period of Rome in many ways resembles that of the Greek city
states, from which it adopted and adapted its alphabet. At first, it was probably
a society of agriculturists organised through lineages rather than a state (even
in historical times its population was grouped into ‘gens’, supposed lineages,
and ‘tribes’) out of which a hereditary ruling class (the ‘Patrician Order’)
developed. It was strategically placed on the last crossing on the River Tiber
before the sea, through which north-south and east-west trade routes passed.
Income from trade (probably from charges on passing traders) added
sufficiently to the surplus from agriculture to enable a village of muddaubed
wooden huts to develop into a prosperous town by the late 6th century BC,
‘with houses of wood and brick, monumental temples, a well-engineered
sewage system and imports of the finest Attic vases’.51 For a period Rome was
under the domination of the Etruscan state to its north—a literate society whose
non-Indo-European language possibly originated somewhere north of the Black
Sea. The Romans threw out the Etruscans at the end of the 6th century (in 509
BC according to Roman tradition), established a republic and embarked on a
long process of military expansion. This passed through various phases over
the next 400 years: a league with various other Latin-speaking cities; the
incorporation of these into the Roman republic; the conquest of the rest of
central Italy; a series of wars with Carthage for control over southern Italy and
the former Phoenician colony in north Africa; the conquest of northern Italy and
Greece; and, finally, the occupation of all of Europe north to the Rhine and
Danube, and the annexation of the former Greek empires in Asia Minor, Syria
and Egypt.
Each stage of this expansion was spearheaded by infantry conscripted from
the independent landed peasantry—at first from those farming land within the
border of the city of Rome, and then also from those with land in other Italian
cities who had been granted Roman citizenship. But if the peasantry bore the
brunt of the fighting, it did not control the army or gain from the victories. For
unlike Athens, Rome was in no sense a democracy.
The republic and the class wars
The constitution of the early republic gave a monopoly of power to a
hereditary elite of ‘Patrician’ families. The Senate, the consuls chosen each
year to implement policy, the judges, the quaestor administrators and the
praetors responsible for law and order were all Patricians. There was an
assembly, which had the nominal right to elect magistrates and decide on
questions of war and peace. But 98 of its 193 votes went to the highest class,
and the delegates from the ‘Plebeian’ small peasants had no say if these were
unanimous in their view, while the propertyless Romans, known as the
proletarii, had only one vote between them.
The leading families used their political control to increase their already
substantial landholdings at the expense of the peasantry, pushing them into debt,
taking their land and relying on the judges to find in favour of the Patricians.
What is more, as commanders of the armed forces, they ensured they took the
lion’s share of conquered land after each military victory. The bitterness
caused by such behaviour boiled over into two great waves of class struggle.
The first began only 15 years after the founding of the republic.
The Roman historian Sallust gave a graphic account of how the class
divide drove the lower orders to rebel:
The Patricians treated the people as slaves, made decisions concerning their
execution and flogging, drove them from their lands. Crushed by these cruel
practices and above all by the load of debt occasioned by the necessity to
contribute both money and military service for continual wars, the common
people armed, took up position on Mons Sacer and on the Aventine and
acquired for themselves tribunes of the people and some legal rights.52
Sallust was writing more than 400 years after the event, and some modern
historians doubt the accuracy of his account. But there were certainly recurrent
struggles for more than a century against arbitrary treatment by Patrician
officials. ‘Secession’—sitting down en masse and refusing to serve in the
army—seems to have been the favourite tactic and to have won the Plebeians
their own elected representatives, ‘tribunes’, to protect them against
oppression from the magistrates.53 The tribunes provided such protection by
literally stepping between the magistrates and their intended victims,54
knowing that the Plebeians had sworn a collective oath to lynch anyone who
touched a tribune.55 They ‘stood to the official state magistrates almost as shop
stewards to company directors,’ according to Ste Croix,56 and over time
became an integral part of the constitution with the power to arrest and
imprison state officials. A last great struggle in 287 BC, a result of debts
afflicting half the population, ended the formal powers of the Patricians and
opened all offices up to Plebeians.57
Later Roman writers like Dionysus and Halicarnassus were to praise the
‘moderation shown in the struggle of the orders, which contrasted with the
revolutionary bloodshed familiar to Greek cities’.58 But the Plebeians did not
gain nearly as much from the victory as the lower classes sometimes did in
Greece, and Rome did not become an Athens-type democracy. As Brunt points
out, only a thin layer of well to do Plebeians gained anything substantial with
the lifting of the bar on them holding office.59 The ‘greater measure of
democratic control’ supposedly granted to the mass of Plebeians ‘was to prove
to be an illusion’:
Plebeians had been admitted to office. But by giving up their monopoly, the
Patricians perpetuated for themselves a share of power. A new nobility arose
to which only a few Plebeians were admitted, and which was to be as
dominant as the Patricians had been…The old social conflicts were to
reappear, but it was harder for the poor to find champions once the political
aspirations of the rich Plebeians had been satisfied.60
This was not to be the last time in history that the interests of well to do
leaders of a struggle were to prove very different from those of their
followers.
One factor which persuaded the poor to acquiesce in this arrangement was
the conquest of new lands by the republic. Some of the poorer peasants were
settled in the new territory, relieving their plight for a time. But the wars of
conquest were soon to cause the condition of most peasants to deteriorate even
further. Most of the loot from conquest went to the rich: ‘Very large sums
flowed into private hands in Italy from abroad…The great bulk went to men of
the upper and middle classes’.61 Much of it went on luxury consumption, but
some went into further expanding the landholdings of the rich, so raising the
price of land and encouraging moneylenders to dispossess indebted peasants.
At the same time, increasing numbers of peasants were being driven into debt,
since long spells of conscription in the legions prevented them from cultivating
their land to pay rents and taxes.
Sallust wrote of the early 1st century BC:
A few men controlled everything in peace and war; they disposed of the
treasury, the provinces, the magistracies, honours and triumphs; the people
were oppressed by military service and by want; the booty of war fell into the
hands of the generals and few others; meantime parents or little children of the
soldiers were driven out of their homes by powerful neighbours.62
But this was not all. The wars also produced a massive new labour force
for the rich to exploit, as captives were enslaved. After the third Macedonian
War, for example, 150,000 prisoners were sold as slaves.63 Big landowners
could buy slaves cheaply and use them to cultivate their latifundia estates at
low cost—thus ‘Cato’s slaves received a tunic and a blanket every year and
ate no meat’.64 It was much more expensive to employ a landless Roman
peasant with a family to raise, so those who lost their land found it difficult to
get anything other than temporary, seasonal work.
The slave population grew massively until, by the 1st century BC, there
were two million slaves—compared with a free population of 3.25 million.
The bare figures understate the importance of slavery to the economy, since the
bulk of the slaves were adults, while the free population included many
children. What is more, at any point in time one in eight adult male citizens
would be in the armed forces.65
If slaves became a major, possibly the major, labour force in the republic,
this did not mean the mass of citizens benefited from their presence. Slave
labour led to the impoverishment of free labour, as shown by the way the
numbers of the free population stagnated or even fell as the Roman state went
from strength to strength. Brunt relates how ‘the poor could not afford to marry
and, if married, to raise children. Families were limited by abortion and
infanticide, if not by contraception’.66 Many children abandoned by poor
parents would end up in the slave markets: ‘The impoverishment of so many
Italians was itself a function of the huge importations of slaves’.67 A H M
Jones came to the same conclusion: ‘The vast import of slaves increased the
destitution the Italian peasantry’.68 Such class polarisation bred a new wave of
civil conflicts—a wave much bloodier than the previous clashes between
Plebeians and Patricians.
Tiberius Gracchus won a tribuneship in 133 BC. He was an aristocrat
worried by the increased poverty of the mass of peasants, and was motivated
partly by concern for the military security of the republic. He could see that the
peasant backbone of the Roman army was slowly being destroyed by the influx
of slaves, while a formidable slave revolt in Sicily had highlighted the dangers
in this way of organising agriculture: ‘Though he spoke with great emotion and
probably with sincerity about the plight of the poor who had fought for their
country, the interest of the state was probably uppermost in his mind; it was to
this that he subordinated the interests of his own class’.69
Nevertheless, his programme excited the poorer peasants and infuriated the
major part of the rich senatorial class. It involved distributing large areas of
public land farmed by the big landowners to the poor. The rural poor flooded
into Rome to back his proposal, covering the walls of the city with placards
and ensuring it was passed by the republic’s assembly. The senators were
horrified. They waited until the peasants had left Rome for the harvest and then
took action. A body of senators insisted Tiberius was ‘betraying the
constitution’ and clubbed him to death. His followers were executed.70
The repression did not stop the seething discontent among the poor
farmers, and history repeated itself ten years later. Tiberius’s brother Gaius
was elected tribune and dominated Roman politics for the next three years,
with support from the peasantry and some backing from a layer of the new rich,
the equites. The consul (supreme magistrate) Optimus distributed arms to the
Senate’s supporters and used 3,000 mercenaries from Crete to murder Gaius
and execute up to 3,000 of his supporters.71 Such were the glorious, ‘civilised’
traditions of the Roman Senate.
The Roman poor revered the Gracchus brothers as martyrs, making daily
offerings at their graves, and both Tiberius and Gaius do seem to have been
motivated by genuine feelings for the sufferings of the masses.72 But their
programme was essentially aimed at strengthening the Roman state and
enhancing its ability to exploit the rest of the empire. They seem to have half-
grasped that slavery, while enriching the big landowners, was weakening the
base of the economy. However, their answer was certainly not to appeal to the
slaves to free themselves and restricted the role of the poor peasants to that of
a pressure group within the existing constitutional setup. It did not even have
much to offer the urban poor of Rome. As result, the Senate had only to bide its
time and could then dispose of the brothers in the bloodiest manner.
The murder of Gaius Gracchus subdued the poor. But it did not deal with
their class bitterness, which played a decisive role in shaping the history of the
1st century BC, and in the transformation of the Roman republic into the Roman
Empire. This was a period in which different factions within the ruling class
engaged in bloody manoeuvres to gain control of political power and of the
wealth from the conquered territories. The resentments of the poor on the one
side, and the class excesses of the senatorial elite on the other, provided them
with weapons to use against each other. Sallust, who lived through the period,
described it as a time of ‘frequent riots, party strife and eventually civil war…
during which a few powerful men…were attempting to rule masquerading as
champions of the Senate or the people’.73
In 108 BC Marius became consul, with the backing of the equites.
According to Sallust he was ‘the darling of all the artisans and rustics whose
hands furnished their only wealth’.74 An attempt to push through a land
distribution bill led to bitter fighting: ‘Violence rose to a new level…All the
respectable elements in society appeared in arms with their retainers’,75 and
lynched Saturninus, an ally abandoned by Marius. Two decades later it was the
turn of Sulpicus, another ally of Marius, to control Rome briefly and to be
killed after an army led by Sulla occupied the city on behalf of the great
senatorial families. When the army withdrew another ally of Marius, Cinna,
retook it and controlled Italy for two years. ‘The forum ran with blood’ as he
sought to bend the senate to his will. But for all his promises, he ‘paid little
attention to popular rights’ and did nothing about the increasing poverty of the
masses.76 Sulla was able to return with the support of the nobility, Cinna was
killed by his own soldiers, and a reign of terror was inflicted on all those who
had put up resistance. Even the dissidents among the rich suffered as Sulla
posted lists of ‘proscriptions’—individuals whose killing merited a financial
reward—including 40 senators and 1,600 equites.77 Finally, in 64 BC
Cataline, a former Sulla henchman facing bankruptcy, tried to restore his
fortunes by raising the standard of popular revolt. He paraded in public with a
motley throng of Sulla veterans and peasants. This time it was the consul (and
writer) Cicero who took decisive and bloody action to preserve the existing
order, organising a select band of wealthy youth to arrest and execute
Cataline’s leading supporters.
Cataline’s rebellion was the last based on a call to the poor peasants to
take up arms. But the bitterness against the rich persisted. Indeed, it began to
infect the poor of the city. Their conditions of life were atrocious and their
livelihoods insecure. They lived in tenements 60 to 70 feet high, squeezed
together in a density seven or eight times that of a modern Western city, their
homes in constant danger of collapsing or catching fire, and with no water and
no access to the sewers. Many could only look forward to seasonal labouring
work in the docks in the summer and faced near-starvation in the winter.78 The
very misery of their condition had prevented them joining the disaffected
peasants in the past. Often they depended on the bribes handed out by rich
senators and had taken the Senate’s side in riots. Now, however, they began to
back politicians or ambitious generals who promised them subsidised corn.
Violence became common in the decade after Cataline’s defeat. Mobs burned
down the Senate house and killed the rich in the street in 52 BC after the
murder of a politician, Clodius, who had given the poor free grain.
This was the background against which Julius Caesar marched his army
across the Italian border and took power in 49 BC. The senatorial rich lost the
ability to run the empire, not to the poor, but to a rich general from an
aristocratic family who had killed or enslaved a million people in his conquest
of Gaul.
The years of the great social conflicts between Roman citizens also
witnessed the biggest slave revolt in the whole of the ancient world, the
uprising led by Spartacus.
Rome had already known more slave revolts than Greece, probably
because the slaves were concentrated on a much greater scale. Sicily was
swept by a slave revolt in 138-132 BC, for example. It involved tens of
thousands of slaves—partly herders and partly agricultural slaves—but they
‘received some support from the local free population who were delighted to
see the suffering of the rich’.79 Indeed, while the slaves tried to keep order on
farms they hoped to cultivate for themselves, the free population engaged in
looting. The pattern was repeated in 104-101 BC.
The revolt of Spartacus was on a bigger scale than these and threatened the
very centre of the Roman Empire. It began in 73 BC with the escape of 74
gladiators. Over time they were joined by up to 70,000 slaves who beat off
successive Roman armies and marched from one end of the Italian peninsula to
the other. At one point they threatened Rome and defeated an army led by the
consuls. But instead of trying to take the city, Spartacus marched to the
southern-most point of Italy, in the hope of crossing to Sicily. His forces were
betrayed by pirates who had promised them boats and were then penned in by
a Roman army which sought to stop them moving north again. Part of the slave
army managed to break out of the trap, but suffered a devastating defeat.
Spartacus was killed, though his body was never found,80 and 6,000 of his
followers were crucified.81 Roman writers claimed 100,000 slaves died in the
crushing of the revolt.82
The revolts in ancient Rome inspired champions of the oppressed for two
millennia. The Gracchus brothers were hailed as an example by the extreme
left in the French Revolution of 1789-94. Karl Marx described Spartacus as
his favourite historical figure, and the German revolutionaries led by Rosa
Luxemburg in 1919 called themselves the Spartakusbund.
But neither the peasant revolts nor the slave rebellions succeeded in
breaking the hold of the great landowners over the Roman Empire, and the
reason lay in the character of the rebellious classes themselves.
The peasants could protest, and even rise up, against the extortions of the
rich. They could flock to rich leaders who seemed to have some programme
for reform of the state. But they could not arrive at a political programme of
their own which went beyond the call for land redistribution and annulment of
debts to suggest a reorganisation of society in its entirety. For the surplus they
produced was too little to maintain a civilisation on the scale of Rome. That
surplus had to come either from the slave system or from the pillage of empire.
The dream of a return to a peasant-based past was natural, but it was
unrealisable.
The urban masses were equally incapable of taking the lead in a
revolutionary reorganisation of society. They were even less central to
production than the small peasants. The most impoverished were dependent on
casual labour. Others were artisans in luxury trades, whose livelihoods
depended on supplying the needs of the rich. There were many slaves in Rome.
But their conditions were often more favourable than those in agriculture, and
many could hope to join the high proportion of the capital’s population who
were free if they were attentive enough to their owners.
Finally, although the rural slaves were central to production, they found it
all but impossible to go beyond heroic rebellion to formulate ideas of a
different sort of society. They came from everywhere in the Mediterranean and
spoke a mass of different languages. Denied the chance to have families, they
also had little chance to pass traditions of resistance from one generation to
another. The way they were united in production—chained under the whip of a
slavemaster—provided no model of how to reorganise society on a different
basis. Instead, their dreams were of establishing new kingdoms or, as with
Spartacus, of escaping from the Roman Empire to freedom somewhere else.
Why Spartacus threw away the opportunity to try to seize Rome is one of the
great mysteries of history. Part of the explanation may be that he could not
conceive of reorganising Roman society and did not want to end up merely
running the old order.
The empire: stagnation and collapse
The riots, revolts, rebellions and civil wars did not lead to a revolutionary
reorganisation of society, but they did radically change the political
superstructure by which the landed rich dominated the rest of society. The
Senate came to depend on generals and their armies to maintain the poor in
their place. But the strongest general was then able to dominate the Senate. The
civil wars over social questions ended only to be replaced by civil wars
between generals: Marius and Cinna against Sulla; Pompey against Julius
Caesar; after Caesar’s death, Brutus and Cassius against Mark Antony and
Octavian (Caesar’s nephew); and, finally, Octavian against Mark Antony.
Eventually, the rich—old and new alike—felt that allowing Octavian (now
called Augustus) to establish a de facto monarchy was the only way to re-
establish political stability. Augustus was able to use the memory of the
decades of social conflict for his own ends. He offered security to the rich
while posing as the friend of Rome’s urban poor by providing them with
cheap, or even free, corn—paid for from a small fraction of the vast tribute that
flowed in from the conquered lands.
The emperors, concerned not to provoke open rebellion in the provinces,
did clamp down on the worst forms of personal profiteering by the senatorial
elite. They also resorted to occasional acts of terror against independent-
minded members of the old landed families, while lavishing wealth and
prestige on members of their own entourage.
The older senatorial families saw this as a barbarous assault on traditional
values. The names of Nero and Caligula have been associated ever since with
random terror and irrational violence, and there is a long tradition of
opponents of arbitrary, dictatorial rule seeing the senators who opposed
Caesar and Augustus as great defenders of human freedom against tyranny. The
early leaders of the French Revolution draped themselves in togas and saw
themselves as taking up the heritage of Brutus. Yet the imperial power did no
more than unleash against a few members of the aristocracy the barbarity it had
traditionally shown to conquered peoples, slaves and rebellious members of
the Roman lower classes. Aristocratic talk of libertas, as Syme points out,
amounted to a ‘defence of the existing order by individuals…in enjoyment of
power and wealth’.83
The poor certainly did not see the senators as standing for freedom.
Josephus, writing in the middle of the 1st century AD, reported that while the
rich resented the emperors as ‘tyrants’ and their rule as ‘subjection’, the poor
regarded them as restraining the ‘rapacity’ of the senate.84 The poor may have
been misled by the demagogy and cheap corn of Caesar and his successors. But
they had good reason to hate the senatorial class. After all, this class had
butchered anyone who had stood up, however hesitatingly, for their rights.
Cicero, often regarded as an exemplar of the civil virtues of the senatorial
class, had organised such murders and referred to Rome’s poor as ‘dirt and
filth’, ‘the starving contemptible rabble’, ‘the dregs of the city’ and, when they
showed any radical tendencies, ‘the wicked’.85
For all their rhetoric about ‘liberty’, the rich could not manage without an
emperor to keep the empire intact and the lower classes in their place. After
Augustus, the rich would sometimes connive to overthrow an individual
emperor. But their alternative was not a new republic, only a different
emperor.86 Indeed, the rich prospered during the first two centuries of rule by
emperors even more than they had in the past. This period (sometimes called
the ‘Principate’ by historians to distinguish it from the ‘later Roman Empire’)
saw a great influx of luxury goods such as silk, spices and gems from the east,
the spread of large estates throughout Italy and into some provinces, and huge
rent flows to the senatorial class.87
The wealth was not restricted to the Roman rich. The provincial rich were
able to share in it, increasingly becoming integrated into a single imperial
ruling class: ‘The provincial communities were far more prosperous than
under the republic’,88 although ‘it is doubtful if the peasantry of the provinces
shared in the increased wealth of the empire’, since they paid the same rate of
tax as the rich landowners.89 Out of the new-found security and increased
wealth of the provincial rich there developed an empire-wide culture, based
on shared religious cults (including emperor worship), ceremonial games,
languages (Latin in the west, Greek in the east) and literature. This was the
period in which cities were rebuilt on a lavish scale from one end of the
empire to the other, with ‘temples for the worship of the gods, theatres, stadia
and amphitheatres, gymnasia and baths, markets, aqueducts and fountains,
besides basilicas for the administration of justice and council chambers and
offices for the magistrates. Cities took great pride in their buildings and vied
with one another in architectural splendour, laying out magnificent paved
streets, lined with colonnades and adorned with triumphal arches’.90
In later centuries people would look back on this as the ‘golden age’ of the
empire. Gibbon writes:
If a man were called to fix the period in the history of the world during which
the condition of the human race was most happy and prosperous, he would,
without hesitation, name that which elapsed between the death of Domitian to
the accession of Commodus [from AD 98-180].91
Yet the stability imposed from above rested, as had the republic before it,
on the pillaging of the peasantry and the subjection of the slaves. It may have
regularised such practices, but it had not eliminated them. The picture of life in
the empire provided by the 2nd century satirical novel The Golden Ass by
Apuleius is very different to Gibbon’s. It describes the conditions of slaves
working for a baker:
Their skin was striped all over with livid scourge-scars; their wealed backs
were crusted rather than clothed with patchwork rags; some had no more
covering than a bit of apron and every shirt was so tattered that the body was
visible through the rents. Their brows were branded, their heads were half
shaved, irons clanked on their feet, their faces were sallow and ugly.92
Apuleius tells how a ‘wealthy and powerful…landlord…was never called
to account’ by the law for the way in which he harassed a poor neighbour—
slaughtering his cattle, stealing his oxen, flattening his corn and employing a
gang of thugs to throw him off his land.93
The world Apuleius satirised was not one of prosperity and joy, but of
insecurity, injustice, torture, robbery and murder. For all the civilised veneer,
the emperor’s might was symbolised by the ‘games’ at the Coliseum, where
gladiators butchered each other and prisoners were torn apart by animals.
The empire might have been stable, but major problems at the base of
society were unresolved. The economy was overwhelmingly rural, although
the ruling class and its civilisation were centred on the cities: ‘Trade and
manufactures played a very limited role in the economy…The basic industry
was agriculture, the vast majority of the inhabitants of the empire were
peasants and the wealth of the upper classes was, in the main, derived from
rent.’ Agricultural output produced 20 times as much revenue as trade and
industry.94
There were a few cities in which trade or manufactures played a
predominant role. This was true of Alexandria, through which passed Egyptian
grain on its way to Italy and luxury goods coming from Arabia and India by
sea. Here some industries did grow substantially—glass making, weaving and
the manufacture of papyrus—and some merchants acquired great wealth.95 But
most cities were centres of administration and ruling class consumption, not
trade and industry. The roads constructed for military purposes were unsuited
to transporting heavy loads—unlike the canals and roads built in China at the
time—and so moving goods by land was extremely slow and costly. A 300
mile journey doubled the cost of wheat, for example. Long distance trade was
restricted to the most expensive luxury goods, and inland cities depended for
the great bulk of their provisions on the surrounding land and their own
craftsmen based in small workshops.
The cities were parasitic on the rural economy rather than a source of
innovation that increased productivity. The great landowners who lived in the
cities looked to increase their incomes by squeezing the cultivators harder
rather than by investing in new tools and land improvements. The slave gangs
who worked most of the land in some regions, especially in Italy, had no
incentive and little opportunity to engage in more productive methods, although
occasionally they could bring knowledge of the more advanced techniques
used in one part of the empire to another. The incentive for peasant proprietors
working the land was hardly any stronger, since any increase in production
was likely to be taken from them in rents to the landowner or taxes to the state.
So although there was some advance in production methods, it was very
limited. Labour saving innovations were put to use very slowly. The
waterwheel, first mentioned in 25 BC, was scarcely used for two centuries
because donkey mills, or even human-drawn mills, fitted more easily the use of
slave labour96—a considerable contrast to the proliferation of water mills in
China during the same period.
All the time, the economic strength of the empire was being undermined by
the very factor which had been so important initially—the massive level of
slavery. The flow of new slaves began to dry up as the wars of conquest which
had brought the empire into being came to an end, and slaves became
expensive. Landowners had to worry more about the lives of their ‘property’.
Some turned to breeding a new generation of slaves. But this meant worrying
about providing for ‘unproductive’ mothers and children, which undercut the
huge cost advantage slaves had once had over free labour. Others found it was
cheaper and easier to let their land at high rents as smallholdings to tenants
who would not require supervision and who would bear the costs of
maintaining their families. In this way, slavery began to decline in importance.
The result was that, while the luxury consumption of the rich and the cost
of maintaining the empire remained as great as ever, the extra surplus which
slavery had provided under the republic was no longer available. The ruling
class could only continue as they had in the past if ever-greater pressure was
applied to the peasantry, replicating across the empire the excessive
exploitation which had already ruined the Italian peasants. Taxation, which had
accounted for only about 10 percent of the peasant family’s produce under the
republic, accounted for a third by the 6th century97—and the peasants had to
pay rent to the landowner on top of this.
Ste Croix points out that Roman records from the late 2nd century AD
onwards refer to ‘disturbances’ in various provinces of the empire—
sometimes amounting to full-blown peasant uprisings, sometimes restricted to
increased brigandage by deserters from the army, impoverished peasants and
escaped slaves. From AD 284 through to the mid-5th century there are periodic
reports of bacaudae peasant rebels in Gaul and Spain.
We have no way of knowing how important such rebellions were. What is
certain is that they were a symptom of growing impoverishment, discontent and
insecurity, especially in the border areas of the empire. There were increasing
instances in these regions of peasants abandoning land which provided them
with no livelihood once they had paid rent and taxes. The state increasingly
passed legislation binding peasants to the land or to particular landowners as
‘coloni’, effectively serfs. But such legal subjection gave them even less
reason to support the empire against ‘barbarian’ incursions.
These incursions became increasingly prevalent and costly to deal with.
The emperors became ever more reliant on massive and expensive mercenary
armies—numbering 650,000 by the 4th century AD.98 But the cost of this put an
even greater burden on the cultivators, leading to further disaffection and flight
from the soil. At the same time, successful military commanders were strongly
tempted to use their legions to seize the crown. As civil wars weakened the
empire, mutinous legionaries even pillaged Rome itself.
The empire entered into a cycle of decline in the west. The military
seizures of power became ever more frequent, the barbarian invasions ever
more daring. In AD 330 the centre of the empire moved from Italy to the
Greek-speaking city of Byzantium, from where the rulers found it difficult to
control the west, and soon rival emperors ruled each half. Meanwhile, the
fringes of the empire, like Britain, passed out of Roman control. Emperors
sought to hang on to the rest by bribing ‘barbarian’ (usually Germanic) peoples
who settled inside the frontiers. But as the barbarian leaders became
Romanised they aspired to the power of the Roman rulers and resorted to the
traditional Roman means of achieving it—conquest. The Goth Alarick led his
forces to sack Rome. The Frank Clovis took control of Gaul. The Ostrogoth
Theodoric made himself emperor of Rome, and the Visigoths established a
Romanised kingdom in Spain.
The vicious circle of decline fed back into the very means of obtaining a
livelihood. The wars and civil wars wrought havoc on agriculture. Trade
declined, as merchants feared to venture far from cities. Taxes and rents were
increasingly taken in kind rather than in cash, with the state providing for its
own needs and those of its numerous employees by direct levies on the
producers. The result was a further decline in trade and in the position of the
merchant and artisan classes. Cities began to encounter problems provisioning
themselves, while towns and villages were driven back on their own
resources. The peasant producers had no protection against the powerful
landowners, who began to exercise direct political and military power over
them. Paying tribute for ‘protection’ to a local bully was often the only way of
warding off the attention of rapacious outsiders. It was a pattern copied by
tribal peoples from the north and east who settled within the empire.
In short, the integrated economy of the empire, based on slavery, gave way
in the west to a new economy of localised, almost self contained rural units
based on serfdom. Slavery did not pass away completely. The use of slave
labour persisted until around the year AD 1000 on some of the larger
landholdings,99 where landowners, compelled by the decline of the towns to
live on their estates, found it a very effective way to pump as much surplus as
possible out of the cultivators. But it no longer provided the basis for
sustaining a civilisation or an empire. The attempts to do so, with the brief
reunification of the eastern and western empires under Justinian in the mid-6th
century and the establishment of the Holy Roman Empire by Charlemagne
almost 250 years later, soon fell apart. The material base was just not strong
enough to sustain such a superstructure.
Chapter 6
The rise of Christianity
There was one great survivor of the crisis of the western Roman empire after
AD 400. This was the religion which had arisen from very small beginnings
over the previous centuries to become the official ideology of the empire—
Christianity. By the time of the ‘barbarian’ invasions every town in the empire
had its church and priests, every province its bishop, all organised into
hierarchies centred on Rome and Byzantium, where church power and imperial
power interacted, with emperors laying down the line on the finer points of
church doctrine.
Christianity had not started off as the ideology of an empire. Virtually
nothing is known about its supposed founder, Jesus of Nazareth. There is not
even any definite proof he was a historical rather than a mythical figure.
Certainly the proof is not to be found in the Christian New Testament. It claims
his birth was in Bethlehem in the Roman province of Judaea, where his family
had gone for a census during the time of Augustus. But there was no census at
the time stated and Judaea was not a Roman province at the time. When a
census was held in AD 7 it did not require anyone to leave their place of
residence. Similarly, the New Testament locates Jesus’s birth as in the time of
King Herod, who died in 4 BC. Roman and Greek writers of the time make no
mention of Jesus and a supposed reference by the Jewish-Roman writer
Josephus is almost certainly a result of the imagination of medieval monks.100
Even the first authenticated reference to Christians, by Tacitus writing in about
AD 100, does not mention Jesus by name but simply uses the Greek word
christos, used for any supposed messiah.
We know as little about the beliefs of the early Christians as we do about
the life of their supposed founder. The New Testament gospels are full of
contradictory statements. In places, especially in Luke, there are powerful
expressions of class hatred. For example, the rich man goes straight to hell,
while the poor man, Lazarus, goes to the ‘bosom of Abraham’.101 Jesus
preaches, ‘It is easier for the camel to go through the eye of the needle than for
the rich man to enter the Kingdom of God’.102 And Luke’s version of the
Sermon on the Mount declares, ‘Blessed are ye poor, for yours is the Kingdom
of God. Blessed are ye that hunger, for ye shall be filled…But woe unto you
that are rich, for ye have received your consolation; woe unto ye that are full,
for ye shall hunger’.103 By contrast, elsewhere the message is one of
reconciliation between rich and poor. So Matthew has Jesus preach, ‘Blessed
are the poor in spirit for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven…Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled’.104 The
parable of the ‘talents’ (coins) suggests a rich man is praiseworthy for
rewarding a servant who is given three talents and invests them profitably,
while punishing a servant who has only one talent and fails to earn interest by
lending it to a banker. It warns, ‘He that hath not, even that which he hath shall
be taken away’.105
Similarly, there are passages which seem to preach resistance to the
existing rulers and passages which encourage subjection to them—as where
Jesus tells people to pay their taxes to the Romans, saying, ‘Give unto Caesar
that which is Caesar’s, give unto God that which is God’s’.106 Finally, there
are contradictions between passages which call for obedience to the rules of
the Jewish faith (‘the Law’) and passages which urge a breach with them.
Karl Kautsky’s classic Marxist work The Foundations of Christianity
suggested almost 90 years ago that the contradiction arose from attempts by
later Christian writers to play down what he called the ‘communist’ ideas of a
‘proletarian’ group. Some of Kautsky’s arguments on this score are open to
doubt.107 Nevertheless, the tone of many passages in the earliest gospels, Mark
and Luke, is one of rebellion against the empire which later adopted the
religion.
To understand how this can be, it is necessary to look at the conditions in
which Christianity emerged and spread.
Jerusalem in the first half of the 1st century was one of the larger cities of
the Roman Empire—Pliny the Elder described it as ‘by far the most illustrious
city of the Orient’. But it was also one of the most tumultuous. The city’s
splendour had arisen from its position close to important trade routes and,
later, as a religious centre attracting wealth from all over the empire. But the
lands around it—Judaea, Samaria and Galilee—were far from rich. They
suffered, as did all the Roman provinces, from the extortionate levels of
taxation required to pay tribute to Rome and to provide Roman governors with
their expected fortunes. There was ‘extensive…evidence of poverty’.108
This led to considerable hostility to the Romans and to a Jewish upper
class which collaborated with them. Jewish kings had, after all, invited in the
Romans in the first place (in 139 BC) and since then had relied upon Roman
help in their internecine wars with each other.109
There were repeated riots in Jerusalem and recurrent outbreaks of
‘banditry’ in the country areas, especially Galilee. Sometimes these would take
on a religious coloration. Thus there was a near uprising against King Herod
as he was dying, and 3,000 Jews are said to have died when his son Archelaus
put down a rising, with a further 2,000 crucified. There was guerrilla war in
the countryside of Galilee led by a certain Judas who called himself ‘King of
the Jews’, and at the time of the Roman census of AD 7 two men ‘aroused the
people to rebellion…and general bloodshed ensued’, according to Josephus.110
Again, 40 years later, the prophet Theudus roused support by proclaiming
himself a messiah (christos in Greek) and was beheaded. The Roman rulers
dealt similarly with ‘a band of evil men who had godless thoughts and made
the city restless and insecure’ as they ‘incited the people to insurrection…
under the pretext of divine revelation’. Soon afterwards ‘a false prophet from
Egypt…succeeded in having himself accepted as prophet because of his
witchcraft. He led…30,000 persons…out of the desert to the so called Mount
of Olives in order to penetrate into Jerusalem, and attempted to overthrow the
Roman garrison.111 ‘Hardly had this rebellion been put down when…a few
wizards and murderers joined forces and gained many adherents…They passed
through the entire Jewish land, plundered the houses of the rich, slaying them
that dwelled therein, set fire to the villages and harried the land’.112 In all these
clashes, class hatred among the Jewish poor of the Jewish upper classes
merged with hatred of the Roman forces of occupation.
Class differences found expression in different interpretations of the
Jewish religion. The rich, who spoke Greek and collaborated with the
Romans, tended to favour the Sadducee school associated with hereditary
priests, said by Josephus to ‘deny that souls are immortal and that there is to be
any reward or punishment after death’ and to be ‘cruel and severe both with
regard to their fellow countrymen as well as towards strangers’. By contrast,
the non-hereditary religious scholars, who came from a range of social
backgrounds,113 tended to favour the Pharisee school. This insisted on strict
adherence to the Jewish ‘Law’ (the rituals and dietary rules of the Old
Testament), objected to upper class collaboration with the Romans, and held
that ‘the soul…is immortal…the souls of the good will enter into new bodies,
while those of the wicked will be tormented by eternal suffering’.114 A third
school, the Essenes, attempted to escape what they saw as the evils of society
by establishing monastic-type communities in the countryside, where they lived
without private property. They also rejected slavery as unjust—a position
more radical than the Christians were to hold. Finally, the Zealots combined
religious faith with political agitation against the Roman presence.
Jerusalem, then, was a cauldron in which competing religious notions gave
expression to different class feelings and attitudes to Roman rule during the
period in which Jesus was said to have preached. But that was not all. Its
religion had adherents in every great city of the empire, so the doctrinal
arguments had repercussions elsewhere. For the Jews had long since ceased to
be a people living in just one small land. Assyrian and Babylonian conquerors
had deported the ruling classes of the Jewish states of Israel and Judaea to
Mesopotamia half a millennium before. Many had not returned when the
Persian emperor Xerxes restored Jerusalem to them, but had been happy to
prosper in new homes. Large numbers of other Jews had left Palestine to settle
elsewhere in the Mediterranean region, for the same reason that so many
Greeks had settled overseas—they wanted a better life than the not very fertile
soil of their one-time homeland could provide. Still others were involuntary
settlers—enslaved during the wars that beset the region, they ended up
wherever their masters took them.
By the beginning of the 1st century AD there were large Jewish
populations in virtually every Roman city, ‘ranging from 10 to 15 percent of
the total population of a city’.115 They made up a high proportion of the
population of Alexandria, so that the Greek city in Egypt was also very much a
Jewish city. They also had a noticeable enough presence in Rome for Julius
Caesar to have sought their favour.
The Jews of this diaspora maintained an identity as a separate community
through their religious belief in a single invisible god, their dietary rules and
their observance of a day of rest. These customs stopped them simply melting
into the populations around them. They were also expected to pay regular
amounts for the upkeep of Jerusalem—which accounted for much of its wealth
—and to visit the city when they could for the Passover festival. The rules
about diet and the sabbath would have been slightly onerous, in the sense of
making it more difficult to socialise and work with the wider non-Jewish
population. But their communities survived, focused on their synagogue
meeting places—probably for similar reasons that immigrant communities are
focused on churches or mosques. The ties of a religion which bound a group
together not only in prayer but also in diet and behaviour would have been a
benefit to people seeking to stay afloat in the atomised world of the city, where
life even for the prosperous trader or artisan was precarious and for the groups
below them desperate.
However, the Jewish communities did not simply survive. They attracted
others to them. ‘Proselytes’—converts to Judaism—were very common in this
period. The Alexandrian Jew Philo told, ‘All men are being conquered by
Judaism…barbarians, Hellenes…the nations of the east and west, Europeans,
Asiatics’.116 So attractive was Judaism in the Greek and Roman cities that a
special category of believers emerged, the ‘God fearers’—non-Jews who
attended synagogue but who were not prepared to undergo circumcision and to
abide by all the biblical rules.
It was not just the sense of community that attracted them. The central
religious idea of Judaism, monotheism—the belief in the one invisible god—
fitted the situation of the urban dwellers. The pagan religions in which there
were many gods, each associated with a particular locality or force of nature,
made sense to the country dweller for whom the local village or clan was the
centre of social existence. But the urban traders, artisans and beggars had
repeated contact with a very large number of people from different localities
and in different occupations. An anonymous, all-embracing deity could seem to
provide support and protection in such multiple encounters. That is why there
were trends towards monotheism in all the great civilisations of antiquity—the
rise of Buddhism in India and China, and the worship of a single ‘good’ god
(involved in an eternal battle with evil) in Persia.117 Even Roman Paganism
tended to worship a sungod more powerful than the others. Furthermore, in its
Pharisaical form, Judaism combined monotheism with the promise to its
adherents that however hard their suffering in this life, they had something to
look forward to in the next.
Such was the popularity of Judaism that it bound together millions of
believers in all the trading centres of the Roman Empire, providing a network
of contacts and communication stretching across thousands of miles.118 All the
religious disputes and messianic speculations occasioned by the situation in
Jerusalem were transmitted along this network. To people in each Roman city
they would not have seemed distant arguments about the situation in Palestine,
since the suffering of Palestine was just one example of the suffering of the
lower classes and the conquered provinces right across the empire.
Judaism was thus on its way to becoming the universal religion of the
urban masses of the empire. But it faced two obstacles. The first was its rules
about diet and circumcision. The phenomenon of the God-fearers shows that
many of those attracted to the religion were not prepared to go all the way in
adopting its rules. The second was Judaism’s promise to its believers that they
were ‘the chosen people’. This clearly clashed with the reality of Roman
domination. Jews in Palestine might plan for some great uprising to overthrow
Roman rule. But the Jews in the diaspora, everywhere a minority, were in no
position to rebel and did little or nothing when the Jews of Palestine did rise
up in AD 70. The defeat of that rising made it even harder for people to take
literally Judaism’s promise that its adherents would take over the world. The
religion could only prosper to the extent that it replaced promises of what
would happen in this world with promises of what would happen in the next.
Christianity emerged as a version of Judaism. Many passages in the
gospels suggest that, at first, it hardly differed from some of the other prophetic
sects of the time. In places, the gospels echo the Pharisees in calling for
obedience to ‘the Law’, echo the Zealots in their call to ‘take up the sword’,
and echo the Essenes in their call to abandon the family for a superior way of
living. In a passage rarely quoted by today’s Christian advocates of the family,
Luke reports Jesus saying, ‘If any man come to me and hate not his father and
mother and wife and children and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life
also, he cannot be my disciple’.119 The accounts of Jesus riding into Jerusalem
to acclamations as ‘king of the Jews’ or driving the money-lenders from the
temple bear a remarkable similarity to Josephus’s account of the actions of
other prophets.120
But Christianity had no special reason to prosper as one Jewish sect
among many. It took Saul of Tarsus, a Greek-speaking convert from
Phariseeism, who lived outside Palestine and worked as a travelling artisan, a
tentmaker, to grasp that there was an enormous audience for new religious
ideas in the cities of the empire. He consciously set out to reach people half-
attracted to Judaism but put off by the stringency of its rules. On conversion, he
changed his name from the Hebrew ‘Saul’ to the Roman name ‘Paul’. In the
face of resistance from ‘Judaic Christians’ based in Jerusalem, he insisted the
new religion had no need of the old circumcision and dietary rules, while an
increased emphasis on the resurrection of the dead meant that salvation no
longer depended on the victory of the defeated Jews of Jerusalem.
Finally, Christianity incorporated emotive elements from other religious
cults which were flourishing at the time. The notion of the redemption of the
world by the death and rebirth of a god was already found in many popular
religions, such as the Adonis, Osiris and other fertility cults (the rebirth of a
dead and buried god signified the onset of spring just as Easter came to
symbolise it for Christians). The story of the virgin birth found in the gospels
of Luke and Matthew (which contradicts Matthew’s claim to trace Jesus’s
ancestry back through Joseph, his father, to the Jewish king David) brought to
Christianity an element from the popular Egyptian mystery cult of Osiris, who
was supposed to have been born of a virgin cow. The image of the ‘Holy
Mary’ bears remarkable similarity to the role played by the goddess Isis in the
Egyptian religion, addressed as ‘most holy and everlasting redeemer of the
human race…mother of our tribulations’.121 It does not require much rewriting
to make this into a Christian prayer to ‘the mother of God’.
The early Christians, then, took the elements which were already leading
Judaism to reap converts, dropped the strict rules which deterred people and
added popular motifs from the mystery religions. It was a winning
combination. This does not at all mean that the early Christians were cold,
calculating manipulators of emotive symbols they did not believe in. Far from
it. They were driven to the religious life by greater than usual sensitivity to the
insecurities and oppression of life in the empire’s cities. Precisely for this
reason they could sense the elements in other religions which would synthesise
with their residual Judaism to give some meaning to the anguish of those
around them. The New Testament credits the apostles with ‘speaking with
tongues’—in ecstatic speeches which gave expression to their innermost
feelings. It was in precisely such a state that they were most likely to
synthesise a new religious vision out of elements from older ones.
Who was the audience for the new religion? It was not, in the main, made
up of the poorest people in the empire, the mass of agricultural slaves, since
early Christianity (unlike the Essenes) did not oppose slavery on principle.
Saint Paul could write that a slave should stay with his master, even if they
were ‘brothers in Christ’. It was not made up of the peasantry, either, for
religion spread outside Palestine through the towns—certainly that is what the
Acts of the Apostles tells us.
The audience seems to have been the mass of middling town dwellers.
This was a layer well below the ruling class families who made up only abut
0.2 percent of the population.122 The ancient city, like many present-day Third
World cities, contained a vast mass of small traders, craftspeople, petty clerks
and minor officials—a broad layer merging into the lumpenproletariat of
beggars, prostitutes and professional thieves at the bottom and into the very
thin stratum of rich merchants and higher officials at the top. This whole layer
would have felt oppressed to a greater or lesser degree by the empire, but
would usually have felt too weak to challenge it openly. Christianity offered a
message of redemption, of a new world to be brought from on high, that did not
involve such an open challenge. At the same time it preached that even if its
message did lead to individual suffering—martyrdom—this would speed up
salvation.
The poorer artisans and tradespeople could certainly be attracted to such a
message—especially since, like the Jewish synagogue, it brought them into a
social milieu which could help them cope with some of the material
uncertainty of this world without necessarily having to wait for the next. There
were also some better off people who were attracted. One study identifies ‘40
persons’ sponsoring ‘Paul’s activities’, ‘all persons of substance, members of
a cultivated elite’.123 Such people could finance the preaching of the apostle
and provide the early Christian groups with meeting places in their houses.124
Paul went out of his way to woo them: ‘It is significant that Paul, although he
knew the majority of his converts came from among the poor, personally
baptised only people from the higher strata’.125 Christianity may have been a
religion which appealed mainly to the poor, but from very early on it tried to
combine this with an appeal to those who were richer. As time went on, it even
attracted some people of real power and wealth who felt discriminated against
by the senatorial elite—wealthy traders, independent women of wealth,
freedmen (ex-slaves and children of slaves) who had prospered, and officials
in the emperor’s own household who came from lowly backgrounds.126
The New Testament was compiled in the 2nd and 3rd centuries from
earlier writings which expressed the changing beliefs of Christianity as the
sect expanded. This explains the contradictions to be found on virtually every
page. Yet these contradictions helped it to appeal across class lines. There was
the sense of revolutionary urgency, of imminent transformation, that came from
the experience of the Jewish rebels in Palestine before the destruction of
Jerusalem. The most bitter resentment could find an outlet in the vision of the
apocalypse, which would witness the destruction of the ‘whore of Babylon’
(easily understood to mean Rome) and the reign of the ‘saints’, with the high
and mighty pulled down and the poor and humble ruling in their place. Yet by
projecting the transformation into the future and into a different, eternal realm,
the revolutionary message was diluted sufficiently to appeal to those whose
bitterness was combined with a strong fear of real revolution. The trader or
workshop owner with a couple of slaves had nothing to fear from a message
which preached freedom in the brotherhood of Christ rather than in material
terms. The rich merchant could be reassured that the ‘eye of the needle’ was a
gate in Jerusalem which a camel might just find it possible to get through.127
The well to do widow or independent wife of a rich Roman could be attracted
by biblical passages in which Paul insists women and men are ‘one’ in the
sight of God, while the Christian husband could be reassured that in this world
his wife had to service him, ‘That the head of every woman is man’.128
The Christian message provided consolation for the poor. It provided a
sense of their own worth to those of the better off who were despised for their
humble origins. And it provided a way in which the minority of the rich who
were revolted by the world around them could discharge their guilt while
keeping their wealth.
The very growth of what was initially a small sect brought about more
growth. Like Judaism, Christianity provided a network of contacts for any
artisan or trader visiting a city. Its weekly gatherings provided the poor with a
sense of prestige from mixing with those wealthier than them, and the wealthier
with a chance to exchange business news with each other. Growing within the
framework of the trade routes and administrative centres which held the
Roman Empire together, over time it became the shadow of that empire—
except that through the trade routes it could spread to regions which the empire
rarely or never touched (Armenia, Persian Mesopotamia, Ethiopia, south
Arabia, even southern India).
The growth of the religion was accompanied by its bureaucratisation. The
first apostles preached without anyone exercising control over what they said,
and relied upon the willingness of local supporters to provide them with food
and lodging as they went from city to city. But as the number of preachers and
supporters grew, collecting funds and administering the group became a major
preoccupation in each city. So too did the danger of ‘false prophets’ who
abused people’s hospitality.
The solution for the local groups was to centralise fundraising and
administration in the hands of ‘deacons’ who were overseen by ‘presbyters’
and bishops. ‘Within two generations’, writes Chadwick in his history of the
church, a hierarchical organisation had grown up with ‘bishops, presbyters and
deacons at the top’ rather than apostles and prophets.129 At first, election of the
bishops was in the hands of ordinary Christians. But it was not long before the
preachers alone had a say. At the same time meetings of bishops began to
determine what was correct doctrine and who was entitled to preach it.
This process was hastened by a great controversy over Christian doctrine
—the question of ‘Gnosticism’. It arose from an issue of interpretation which
must seem obscure to anyone without religious belief—where evil came from.
But it had profound practical consequences. Christian theology held that there
was only one god, who had created everything. This meant he must have
created evil as well as good—a disturbing conclusion for believers who
always bracketed ‘God’ and ‘good’ together. The response of orthodox
Christianity has usually been to try and dilute the problem by placing lots of
intermediaries between God and evildoing (fallen angels, demons, disobedient
humanity). When this does not carry conviction, it declares that the very fact
God knows the answer to this problem while we do not shows how much
greater is his understanding than ours.
There was, however, a more logical answer. This was to say that there
was a continual struggle in the universe between two principles, one of good
and one of evil. This was the answer posed, at least partially, by the Gnostics.
Spirit, they said was good, the material world and the human body were evil.
Christians could only be pure if they freed their souls of bodily concerns. This
was not a completely original conclusion—it is implied by many passages in
the New Testament. But it had implications which were bound to worry the
church authorities. If the mind alone was pure, then the only good Christians
were those who turned their backs on the material world—ascetics who
starved themselves and lived in rags. This was hardly the recipe for winning
the whole of humanity to the gospel, or for raising funds from rich people for
the local church. Worse, however, some Gnostics came to an even more
radical conclusion. If the mind was pure, then it did not matter what the body
did, since anything it did was impure. Their slogan became ‘to the good,
everything is good’. It permitted them to live as luxuriously as they wanted, to
despoil the goods of others (especially the rich) and, most horrifying of all to
the church elders, to engage in free love.
The struggle over the issue raged through the Christian congregations for
decades and was only resolved by the bishops asserting that they alone, as
successors to the apostles, could pronounce on issues of doctrine.130 The
argument erupted again in the 3rd century when a Syrian, Mani, began to build
a religion (‘Manicheism’) from elements of Gnostic Christianity, Buddhism
and Persian Zoroastrianism. For a time it even won over Augustine of Hippo,
later the dominant figure in mainstream Christian thought.
In the struggle against such ‘heresies’ the church bureaucracy moved on
from controlling administration to controlling the doctrine which the organised
churches were allowed to follow. In doing so, it made it more difficult for
contradictions in the Bible to provide a focus for rebellious sentiments which
might upset wealthy elements aligned with Christianity.
If Christianity was the slightly dissident shadow of the Roman Empire, the
church hierarchy was turning into a shadow bureaucracy—a second empire-
wide administrative structure standing alongside the first. But it was a shadow
bureaucracy which could provide services to the population of the cities that
the empire could not. Its ‘intense sense of religious community’ enabled it to
remain moored in every town through the crisis of the late 3rd century.131
‘During public emergencies such as plague or rioting, the Christian clergy
were shown to be the only unified group in the town able to look after the
burial of the dead and to organise food supplies…To be a Christian in 250
brought more protection from one’s fellows than to be a Roman citizen’.132
By this time there were only two things which could disrupt the growth of
the church’s following and influence—repression from the state or dissent from
within.
Apologists for Christianity always make much of its survival in the face of
persecution and repression. Martyrs who died for their faith are saints as much
as those who supposedly worked miracles. But the repression of the church in
its early years was intermittent. The few supposed Roman Christians of the
time suffered under Nero as scapegoats for the burning of Rome. But that wave
of repression did not outlast his own early demise. From time to time other
Christians were imprisoned or even faced execution at the hands of hostile
provincial governors, usually for refusing to take part in imperial cults. But
much of the time the imperial authorities tolerated the parallel organisation that
was growing beneath them, with 3rd century emperors like Alexander Severus
and Philip the Arab even favourable to the church.
However, by the late 3rd century the church had attained a degree of
influence which meant it could no longer be ignored. The emperors had the
choice of destroying the parallel organisation or cooperating with it. Maximus
felt it was time to clamp down on a network of influence that reached right into
the imperial bureaucracy. Diocletian, emperor after 284, went further. He was
persuaded that Christianity threatened the unity of the armed forces and
responded by knocking down the cathedral opposite his imperial palace in
Nicodemia, issuing an edict for the destruction of all churches, ordering the
arrest of all clergy and threatening the death penalty to anyone who would not
sacrifice to the gods. There was a wave of persecution in the eastern empire.
However, it was too late for such measures to be effective. The ruler of the
west, Constantius, took only token measures to enact Diocletian’s decrees, and
his son Constantine opted to win the church to his side in his battle for
supremacy in the western empire in 312. He began to regard himself as a
Christian—he had been a sun worshipper—and the Christians certainly began
to regard him as one of themselves. They were not worried by Constantine’s
own behaviour, although he had a son drowned in a bath, executed his wife,
and put off being baptised until his deathbed in order to ‘sin’ freely. With the
persecution over, the Christians were now in a position to persecute non-
believers and dissident groups within their own faith.
The years of the final winning over of the empire were also years in which
new heresies affected whole sections of the church. But once the imperial
administration had thrown in its lot with the church bureaucracy, any threat to
that bureaucracy was a threat to itself. Having embraced Christianity,
Constantine was soon deposing and exiling bishops who would not abide by
his rulings.133 His successors followed the same path, creating havoc as they
backed one side and then another, so that the Egyptian bishop Athanasius was
removed and reinstated five times. Only the emperor Julian abstained from the
controversy. He tolerated all forms of Christian worship in the hope that the
rival groups would destroy each other while he set about reviving Paganism.
This final phase of the Christian takeover of the empire also saw the birth
of the important phenomenon of monasticism. The very success of the church
led to continual dissidence from people who felt it had abandoned its original
message of purity and poverty. Bishops were now powerful figures, living in
palaces, mixing much more with those who ran the empire than with the lowly
people who filled the churches. A movement began, initially in Egypt, of
people who felt they could only earn redemption by following a path away
from the earthly success of the bishop. They would leave the towns for the
desert, where they would live on bread and water brought to them by
sympathisers, dress in rags and reject any sexual activity. Known as
anchorites, these hermits believed that by deliberately entering upon a life of
suffering they were saving themselves from sin, in much the way that Jesus had
saved the world. Their behaviour earned the respect of other believers, who
felt they were closer to the message of the gospels than the well-housed
bishops.
The movement was potentially subversive. It threatened to throw up
heresies in which prophets could use the words of the gospels to unleash
hatred against the empire and the rich. Yet it was not long before it had become
incorporated in the existing system. Some of the hermits were soon
congregating close to each other for reasons of convenience, and it was only a
short step from this to accepting that their sacrifice should involve labouring
together under strict discipline. Basil of Caesarea turned this into a discipline
of ideas as well as labour, subordinating individual self sacrifice to a higher
authority. It was not long before his successors were directing their fervour
into physical force against those with different Christian ideas.134
However, monasticism had another longer term consequence. With their
large, religiously fervent labour forces, the monasteries had a degree of
protection from the disorders that accompanied the decline of the empire in the
west. They became havens in which scholars could find security as the empire
collapsed around them. While secular libraries burned, some monastic
libraries survived, their keepers regarding it as a religious duty to copy by
hand page after page of sacred—and sometimes profane—texts. At the same
time the monasteries also became places where those lacking religious
enthusiasm could pass a time protected from the chaos of the world, with
ordinary peasants increasingly doing much of the labour and leaving the monks
free to pursue a life of prayer and scholarship, or plain idleness. In any case,
what had begun as islands of religious devotion, intended as a rejection of a
corrupt society, became a powerful force in the post-imperial west within a
couple of centuries. The network of religious establishments, sustained by the
surplus from the exploitation of their own labour forces and coordinated by the
hierarchy of bishops with the pope at the top, became a powerful participant in
the scramble for wealth and privilege across western Europe for the next 1,000
years.
Part three
The ‘Middle Ages’
Chronology
AD 600 to 900
‘Dark Ages’ in Europe. Collapse of trade. Failure of attempts by Franks to re-
establish Roman-type empire (Charlemagne in 800-814). Invasions by
Norsemen (800-900).
Feudalism in India. Collapse of trade. Dominance of brahmans and caste
system in villages.
Crisis of Byzantine Empire, loss of Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia and Balkans.
Technical and economic stagnation.
Mohammed takes Mecca (630). Islamic Arab armies conquer most of Middle
East (mid-640s), reach Kabul (664), Spain (711). Abbasid revolution in 750
gives some political influence to merchants. Growth of trade and handicraft
industry. High point of Islamic culture, translation of Greek texts, advances in
science, mathematics, great Islamic philosophers.
Centre of Chinese civilisation moves towards rice growing areas of Yangtze.
Revival of industry and trade, flourishing of Buddhism, advances in
technology.
Growth of civilisations in west and coastal east Africa.
10th and 11th centuries
Recovery of agriculture and trade in Europe. Use of more advanced
techniques. Serfdom replaces slavery.
Muslim Abbasid Empire loses economic momentum and splits up. Rise of
mystical and magical forms of Islam. Fatimid Dynasty in Egypt.
Byzantium conquers some of Balkans, but continued technical stagnation.
West African civilisations adopt Islam and Arabic script.
High point of Chinese civilisation under Sung Dynasty (960-1279). Invention
of paper, printing, gunpowder, mechanical clocks, compass, growth of
influence of merchants.
12th and 13th centuries
Crisis of Islamic Mesopotamia. Chinese Empire splits in two (Sung and Chin).
Mongol pastoralists ravage Eurasia from Poland to Korea. Sack Baghdad
(1258). Conquer China (1279).
West European ‘Crusaders’ attack Islamic Empire from west. Capture
Jerusalem (1099-1187), sack Byzantium (1204).
Conquest of north Indian heartland by Islamic peoples from central Asia. New
growth of trade, use of money.
Growth of agricultural output, population, trade and handicraft industries in
Europe. Spread of watermills, building of cathedrals, rediscovery through
contact with Islamic Spain of Greek and Latin texts, first European
universities. Use of techniques discovered in China. Rise of Italian city states.
Dante (born 1265) writes in Italian.
Slave-soldiers (mamlukes) seize power in Egypt.
Rise of Mali kingdom in west Africa. Timbuktu a centre of Islamic
scholarship.
14th century
Great crisis of European feudalism. Famine, black death, revolts in Flanders,
France, England, Wales, northern Italy. Rival popes. Hundred Years War
between England and France.
Hunger and plague in China. Red Turbans rebellion against Mongols in China,
founding of (Chinese) Ming Dynasty. Revival of agriculture. Ottoman Turks
begin to conquer Asia Minor.
Building of Great Zimbabwe.
Aztec people found Tenochtitlan.
15th century
Renewed economic growth in China, fleet sails thousands of miles to east
coast of Africa.
Aztec Empire in Mexico. Incas conquer whole Andean region after 1438.
Rise of Benin in west Africa.
Slow economic and population recovery in western Europe. Decline in
serfdom. Spread of market relations. Printing. Renaissance in northern Italy.
Improved shipbuilding and navigation techniques. Portuguese sail down west
African coast, reach Cape. Spanish monarchs conquer Moorish Granada
(1492). Columbus crosses Atlantic (1493).
Chapter 1
The centuries of chaos
The 5th century was a period of break up and confusion for the three empires
which had dominated southern Eurasia. There was a similar sense of crisis in
each, a similar bewilderment as thousand year old civilisations seemed to
crumble, as barbarians swept across borders and warlords carved out new
kingdoms, as famine and plagues spread, trade declined and cities became
depopulated. There were also attempts in all three empires to fix on
ideological certainties to counter the new insecurity. In Roman north Africa,
Augustine wrote one of the most influential works of Christian doctrine, City
of God, in an attempt to come to terms with the sacking of the earthly city of
Rome. In China, the Buddhist doctrines elaborated almost a millennium before
in India began to gain a mass of adherents, especially among the embattled
trading classes. In India new cults flourished as Hinduism consolidated itself.
The similarity between the crises of the civilisations has led some
historians to suggest they flowed from a global change in climate. But to blame
the weather alone is to ignore the great problem that had beset each of the
civilisations for centuries. It lay in the most basic ways in which those who
worked the land made a livelihood for themselves and everyone else.
Advances in agricultural productivity were nowhere near comparable to those
associated with the spread of ironworking a millennium before. Yet the
consumption of the rich was more lavish and the superstructure of the state
vaster than ever. A point was bound to be reached at which things simply could
not go on as before, just as it had with the first Bronze Age civilisations.
The crisis was gravest for the Roman world. The flourishing of its
civilisation had depended on an apparently endless supply of slaves. The
result was that the imperial authorities and the great landowners concerned
themselves much less with ways of improving agricultural yields than their
equivalents in India or China. The collapse was correspondingly greater.
The period which followed in Europe is rightly known as the ‘Dark Ages’.
It saw the progressive collapse of civilisation—in the sense of town life,
literacy, literature and the arts. But that was not all. The ordinary people who
had paid such a price for the glories of Rome paid an even greater price with
its demise. Famine and plague racked the lands of the former empire and it is
estimated that the population halved in the late 6th and 7th centuries.1 The first
wave of Germanic warriors to sweep across the former borders—the Goths
and Franks, the Visigoths and Ostrogoths, the Angles, Saxons and Jutes—began
to settle in the Roman lands and soon adopted many Roman customs,
embracing the Christian religion and often speaking in Latin dialects. But
behind them came successive waves of conquerors who had not been touched
by Roman influence in the past and came simply to loot and burn rather than
settle and cultivate. Huns and Norsemen tore into the kingdoms established by
the Franks, the Goths and the Anglo-Saxons, making insecurity and fear as
widespread in the 9th and 10th centuries as it had been in the 5th and 6th.
Eventually all the conquerors did settle. The majority had, in fact, been
cultivators in their lands of origin, already beginning to use iron for tools as
well as for the weapons that enabled them to defeat ‘civilised’ armies in battle.
Their societies had already begun to make the transition from primitive
communism towards class division, with chieftains who aspired to be kings,
and aristocrats ruling over peasants and herders who still had some remaining
traditions of communal cultivation. Had Roman agriculture been more
advanced and based on something other than a mixture of large, slave-run
latifundia and the smallholdings of impoverished peasants, the conquerors
would have successfully taken over its methods and settled into essentially
Roman patterns of life. We shall see that this is what happened with successive
waves of ‘barbarians’ who carved out empires in China and its border lands.
But Roman society was already disintegrating as its conquerors swept in, and
they simply added to the disintegration. Some of the conquerors did attempt to
adopt Roman agriculture, cultivating huge estates with captives from war.
Some also attempted to re-establish the centralised structures of the old
empire. At the end of the 5th century the Ostrogoth Theodoric proclaimed
himself emperor of the west. At the end of the 8th, Charlemagne established a
new empire across most of what is now France, Catalonia, Italy and Germany.
But their empires fell apart at their deaths for the same reason that the original
Roman Empire fell apart. There was not the material base in production to
sustain such vast undertakings.
Soon the cities were not only depopulated but often abandoned and left to
fall apart. Trade declined to such a low level that gold money ceased to
circulate.2 Literacy was confined to the clergy, employing a language—literary
Latin—no longer used in everyday life. Classical learning was forgotten
outside a handful of monasteries, at one point concentrated mainly on the Irish
fringe of Europe. Itinerant, monkish scholars became the only link between the
small islands of literate culture.3 The books which contained much of the
learning of the Graeco-Roman world were destroyed as successive invaders
torched the monastic libraries.
Such was the condition of much of western Europe for the best part of 600
years. Yet out of the chaos a new sort of order eventually emerged. Across
Europe agriculture began to be organised in ways which owed something both
to the self contained estates of the late Roman Empire and the village
communities of the conquering peoples. Over time, people began to adopt
ways of growing food which were more productive than those of the old
empire. The success of invaders such as the Vikings was testimony to the
advance of their agricultural (and maritime) techniques, despite their lack of
civilisation and urban crafts. Associated with the changing agricultural
methods were new forms of social organisation. Everywhere armed lords,
resident in crude fortified castles, began simultaneously to exploit and protect
villages of dependent peasants, taking tribute from them in the form of unpaid
labour or payments in kind. But it was a long time before this laid the basis for
a new civilisation.
Chapter 2
China: the rebirth of the empire
The Chinese Empire, like the Roman Empire, fell apart in the face of economic
breakdown and famine within, and incursions by ‘barbarians’ from without.
The 4th century was marked by droughts, plagues of locusts, famine and civil
wars, a splintering into rival empires, and political, economic and
administrative chaos. Something like a million people abandoned their homes
and farms, fleeing south from the north China heartland to the Yangtze and
beyond. They left a region of devastation and depopulation, where much land
had fallen out of cultivation and productive life had reverted to self sufficient
farming, with little trade and a decline in the use of money.4
Yet the term ‘Dark Ages’ is not appropriate for what followed. Life was
extremely hard for the great mass of peasants, and a countless number died
from hunger and disease. But civilisation did not collapse. The agricultural
devastation of the north was soon offset by the vigorous and sustained
expansion of rice cultivation in the Yangtze region. This replenished the
surplus needed to sustain flourishing cities and, with them, a literate elite.
While western Europe turned in on itself, southern China was opening up trade
routes with south east Asia, the Indian subcontinent and Iran. In the north, rival
‘barbarian’ dynasties fought for control. But they were dynasties which
recognised the benefits of Chinese civilisation and embraced Chinese culture.
What is more, the ‘barbarians’ did not simply learn from China. They had
some things to teach the old civilisation. Their artisans and herders had been
able to develop certain techniques precisely because their societies had not
been weighed down by the costs and traditions of empire. These techniques
now flowed into China—‘methods of harnessing horses, use of the saddle and
stirrup, ways of building bridges and mountain roads, the science of medicinal
plants and poisons, seafaring, and so on’.5 Such innovations opened the way
for increased wealth and an increased surplus. For example, the horse had
been used previously in warfare and for speedy communication. But the old
methods of harnessing half-strangled it and made it virtually useless for pulling
heavy loads or ploughs, tasks that were left to the much slower oxen. The new
techniques from the northern steppes began to change this.
The collapse of the central empire was not wholly negative in terms of
intellectual development, either. The wars destroyed libraries and
irreplaceable manuscripts. But the weakening of old intellectual traditions
made space for new ones. Buddhism began to gain influence, brought to China
by merchants who trod the long trade routes through Tibet and on through
Samarkand to Iran, or who sailed from southern China to southern India.
Indian, Iranian and Greek influences began to make an appearance in Chinese
art, so that some Buddhist statues show the impact of Hellenic styles. Gernet
goes so far as to speak of a ‘golden age of medieval civilisation’, an
‘aristocratic world animated by intense religious fervour and permeated by the
great commercial currents which flowed along the trails of central Asia and the
sea routes to the Indian Ocean’.6 Certainly, this was all very different from the
European Dark Ages.
At the end of the 6th century the empire was reunited, first under the Sui
and then under the T’ang Dynasty. Military victory over their enemies enabled
the new emperors to extract a surplus from the mass of the population sufficient
to undertake enormous public works. Two new capitals, Loyang and Ch’ang-
an, were built. Loyang’s walls stretched nine kilometres east to west, eight
kilometres north to south, and enclosed a rectangular city of 25 crossing
avenues, each over 70 metres wide. Canals 40 metres wide and several
hundred kilometres long linked the Yellow, Wei and Yangtze rivers, enabling
rice from the south to feed the northern cities. Several hundred kilometres of
the Great Walls were rebuilt along the north west frontier, and military
campaigns extended the empire’s influence east into Korea, west as far as the
borders of India and Persia, and south into Indochina.
There was an administrative structure run by full time scholar-officials,
some recruited by a system of examinations. It began to act as a counter-
balance to the landowning aristocrat class, and tried dividing the land into
small peasant holdings so as to ensure the surplus went to the state as taxes, not
to the aristocrats as rents.7 State monopolies of salt, alcohol and tea added to
its revenues.
The state was powerful, closely policing life in the cities, and
Confucianism—with its stress on conformity and obedience—was dominant
within the state bureaucracy. But growing trade brought ideological influences
from all over Asia. Buddhism grew enormously in importance, ‘Nestorian’
Christianity (condemned as a heresy in Rome and Byzantium) had some
impact, and Manicheism and Zoroastrianism found adherents. The coastal
commercial cities of the south contained numbers of foreign merchants—
Malays, Indians, Iranians, Vietnamese, Khmers and Sumatrans. Canton even
had Shi’ite and Sunni mosques for its Muslim merchants. Chinese influences
also radiated in all directions—with Buddhism and the Chinese language and
literature spreading to Korea and Japan, and knowledge of paper-making
passing through Samarkand to Iran, the Arab world and eventually, after many
centuries, to Europe.
The T’ang Dynasty lasted three centuries, but then went into crisis. There
were repeated quarrels at the top between the bureaucrats and courtly circles.
Some rulers encouraged Buddhism, while others tried to smash it. The costs of
sustaining the luxury lifestyles of the ruling class, the public works and an
enormous empire soared. The state’s revenues suffered as the class of small
farmers went into sharp decline with the rise of large estates worked by tenant
farmers and wage labourers.
Meanwhile, the plight of the mass of peasants went from bad to worse. In
one region 90 percent of the peasants were reported to be ‘living from hand to
mouth’.8 There was a growth of banditry and ‘frequent rural riots, in which
peasants participated’. In the 870s a wave of rebellion broke out, threatening
the whole empire.9 An insurgent army undertook a great march from north to
south and back again to capture the imperial capital, Ch’ang-an, in 880.10
However, it did not win a victory for the hard-pressed peasantry. Most of
its members were not peasants—who were loath to leave their plots for any
period of time—but people who had drifted away from the land, while its
leaders came ‘partly from the rural gentry and partly from the impoverished
classes’. Its leader, Hung Ch’ao, ‘had even been selected as a local candidate
for the [civil service]…examination’. In a matter of days, the army and its
leaders were following different paths. The rank and file fighters joined forces
with the local poor and looted the world’s most prosperous city: ‘The markets
were set ablaze and countless people slaughtered…The most hated officials
were dragged out and killed.’ By contrast, Hung’s ambition was to establish a
stable regime with himself as emperor. He revived the imperial system,
removing from the state administration only the highest officials, leaving old
aristocrats in key positions and taking vicious measures against any of his
followers who complained. When someone wrote a poem ridiculing the regime
on the gate of a ministerial building, Hung’s deputy ‘killed the officials serving
in the department, plucking out their eyes, and hung up their bodies; he
executed the soldiers who had guarded the gate, killed everybody in the capital
who could compose poetry and employed all other literate people as menials.
In all, more than 3,000 people were killed.’
Having turned against his own followers, Hung was unable to keep the
throne. An imperial general retook the city from the remains of the demoralised
rebel forces a year later. But the rebellion marked the effective end of the
T’ang Dynasty, which lost any real power as rival generals fought over the
empire. It fell apart into five rival states (‘the five dynasties’) for half a
century, until it was reunited under a new dynasty, the Sung.
The rebellion was similar in many ways to those that had brought down the
Ch’in Dynasty in 206 BC and had help break apart the Han Empire after AD
184. There were to be other rebellions in the course of Chinese history, often
following a similar pattern. A dynasty established itself and embarked upon
ambitious plans of palace building, and canal and road construction; it
attempted to ward off threats from pastoralists along its northern and western
borders with expensive fortifications and foreign wars; it extended its power,
but pushed the mass of the rural population to such levels of poverty that
rebellions erupted which broke the imperial power apart; then some rebel
leader or imperial general established a new dynasty which started the whole
cycle again.
The rural poor never gained the benefits of victory. Scattered across the
length and breadth of the countryside, tied to their individual plots of land,
illiterate, knowing little of the outside world, they could rebel against acts of
oppression by the existing state, but they could not collectively counterpose to
it a new state in which they ruled as a class. Instead, they looked to create a
state in the image of the existing one, but under a ‘good’ rather than a ‘bad’
emperor. It meant that even in victory they set up new rulers who treated them
much as the old ones did.
This process even became incorporated into the ruling ideology, with the
notion of the legitimacy of a dynasty depending on ‘the mandate of heaven’,
which periodically would pass from one dynasty to another.
Yet the recurrent pattern does not mean Chinese society was ‘changeless’,
as many Western writers used to claim. As dynasties came and went there were
cumulative changes, involving the gradual introduction of new techniques into
productive activities and, with them, important changes in the relationships
between different groups in society.
Leading the world
China continued to undergo a great economic transformation. The owners of
large landed estates, worked either by tenant farmers or wage labourers,
sought to increase their incomes by investment in new farming implements and
milling machinery, and by methods which enabled them to obtain more than one
crop a year from their land.11 There was continued migration from the north to
the rice-growing areas of the Yangtze Valley and the south. There was a sharp
rise in agricultural productivity, and a corresponding growth in the surplus that
the rich could use to buy various luxuries.
Trade networks began to connect farmers to local markets, and local
markets to provincial cities, which grew in size and importance. More boats
than the world had ever seen plied the 50,000 mile network of rivers and
canals, carrying not just luxuries for the rich but also bulk products. Money
played an increasing part in the transactions of all sections of society and
banknotes began to be used as well as coins. The number of traders grew, and
some became very rich. The cities grew until the Sung Dynasty’s capital, K’ai-
feng, enclosing an areas 12 times the size of medieval Paris, probably had a
million inhabitants,12 and the city of Hang-chou, in the Yangtze Valley, anything
between one and a half million and five million.13
Industries grew as well. In K’ai-feng, ‘arsenals served the country as a
whole…at a time when military technology was developing rapidly’ a textile
industry grew up, based on resettled workers from ‘Szechwan and the Yangtze
delta’ and the iron and steel industries became ‘highly organised enterprises
dependent on more sophisticated techniques, great investments in equipment
and large numbers of workers’, under the control of both the government and
‘private iron masters’. Workshops ‘produced articles of luxury for the imperial
family, high officials and wealthy businessmen’, but also ‘building materials,
chemicals, books and clothing’.14
There was considerable technological innovation. Pit coal was substituted
for charcoal in metallurgy, water-driven machinery was used for working
bellows, and explosives were employed in the mines. The quantity of iron
produced in 1078 exceeded 114,000 tons—it only reached 68,000 tons in
England in 1788.15 There was an unprecedented expansion of ceramics and
porcelain-making—a technique not discovered in Europe for another 700
years. Gunpowder was in use by 1044—240 years before the first European
mention of it. By 1132 it propelled rockets from bamboo tubes and by 1280
projectiles from bronze and iron mortars.16 New naval technologies
—‘anchors, rudders, capstans, canvas sails and rigid matting sails…watertight
compartments, mariners’ compasses’—enabled Chinese ships to reach the
Arabian Gulf and even the east coast of Africa.17 Some could carry 1,000
people, and Chinese map-making was far ahead of not only that of Europe, but
also the Arab Middle East.
Finally, advances in book production permitted the creation of a literature
aimed at a sizeable middle class audience for the first time in history. Printing
from engraved blocks was already taking place in the 9th century. There
appeared works on the occult, almanacs, Buddhist texts, lexicons, popular
encyclopaedias, manuals of elementary education and historical books, as well
as classic works, the complete Buddhist writings, printed promissory notes
and practical manuals on medicine and pharmacy.18 By the 11th century
moveable type existed, based on the fitting together of individual characters,
although it was not used for large-scale printing until the 15th century—
probably because the large number of Chinese characters did not make it any
quicker or more economical than block printing. In any case, China possessed
printed books half a millennium before Europe, and the written word ceased to
be the prerogative of a literate elite or of those who dwelt in the great
monasteries. Schools, both state-run and private, multiplied, especially in the
new economic heart of the country, the lower Yangtze region. As one Chinese
writer who lived in this region at the time wrote, ‘Every peasant, artisan and
merchant teaches his son how to read books. Even herdsmen and wives who
bring food to their husbands at work in the fields can recite the poems of the
men of ancient times’.19
The growth of trade and industry was matched by a growth in the
prosperity, size and influence of the merchant class, so that some historians
even refer to it as a ‘bourgeoisie’. Twitchett writes that by the late Sung period
there was ‘a wealthy, self conscious urban middle class with a strong sense of
its own identity and its own special culture’.20 What is more, there was an
important shift in the attitude of the state towards the merchants. Previous
dynasties had seen the merchants ‘as a potentially disruptive element’ and kept
them ‘under constant supervision’.21 Curfews had prevented anyone going on
the streets of the cities after nightfall, markets had been confined to walled city
areas under tight state supervision, and merchants’ families had been barred
from positions in the state bureaucracy. Now many of these restrictions fell
into disuse. By the early 11th century one high official could complain of the
lack of ‘control over the merchants. They enjoy a luxurious way of life, living
on dainty foods of delicious rice and meat, owning handsome houses and many
carts, adorning their wives and children with pearls and jade, and dressing
their slaves in white silk. In the morning they think about how to make a
fortune, and in the evening they devise means of fleecing the poor’.22
The new urban rich began to use their economic power to exert influence
over the imperial bureaucracy:
The examination system now became a route by which increasing numbers of
men from outside the circle of great families could enter the higher levels of
the imperial government…The new bureaucrats were increasingly drawn from
the families who had benefited most from the commercial revolution…the rich
merchants and the wealthy landowners.23
Only a few hundred men would pass the national examinations,24 but they
were the apex of a huge system. By the 13th century there were some 200,000
students in government schools and thousands more in private and Buddhist
schools, all of whom dreamed of getting to the top. A good number came from
merchant families.
Lost centuries
The merchants were still far from running the state, even if they were an
increasingly important pressure group. Most large-scale production was still
under state control, even when profitable activities—such as operating state-
owned ships—were contracted out to merchants. The state itself was run by
bureaucrats trained as scholarly officials, whose ideal was the country
gentleman.25 This was also the ideal for the merchant’s son who obtained an
official position. The result was that, just as the Sung Empire was reaching its
peak, new signs of crisis began to appear.
What historians usually call ‘neo-Confucianism’ was the dominant
ideology within the state. It stressed the need for rulers and administrators to
follow an orderly routine, based upon mutual respect, which attempted to
avoid both the violent actions of aristocratic warrior classes and the ruthless
profit-making of merchants. It set the tone of the studies to be undertaken by
anyone who aspired to a post in the state bureaucracy and it suited a
conservative social layer whose ideal was a life of scholarly leisure rather
than the hurly-burly of ruthless competition and military turmoil.
It also accorded with the approach of the early Sung emperors. They
blamed the collapse of the previous T’ang Dynasty on expensive policies of
military expansionism, so they cut the size of the army and relied on bribery to
buy peace from border states. This approach was expressed through semi-
religious notions about the harmony of nature and society. But it contained a
rational, pragmatic core. It was a way out of the long years of crisis that had
gone before.
Many Western writers have concluded that the dominance of neo-
Confucianism blocked the path of capitalist advance in China. They have seen
its hostility to ‘the spirit of capitalism’ as keeping Chinese society stagnant for
millennia. Others have emphasised the ‘totalitarianism’ which supposedly
stopped Chinese economic development.26 But, as we have seen, in the Sung
era Chinese society was far from stagnant. Non-Confucian ideas (Buddhist,
Taoist and Nestorian) not only existed but were found in print. And officials
who in theory stood for Confucian pieties in practice behaved very differently.
Patricia Ebrey, for instance, has shown how a widely distributed Sung advice
manual for the gentleman class, Yüan Ts’ai’s Precepts For Social Life
contradicted many neo-Confucian tenets. The writer ‘assumed one’s goal in
business was profit’, and expressed ‘business-like attitudes’, so that ‘those
fully committed to…neo-Confucianism would have to abstain from most of the
activities [he]…describes’.27
There was a gap between the prevalent neo-Confucian ideology and the
activities of the merchant class. But it was a gap that class could tolerate so
long as the economy was growing and it was becoming richer and more
influential—just as the first European capitalists hundreds of years later were
prepared to work with monarchic states and accept their official ideologies so
long as these did not impede the making of money.
The peculiarity of China which weakened the ability of the merchants and
wealthier tradesmen to transform themselves into a full-blown capitalist class
was material, not ideological. They were more dependent on the officials of
the state machine than was the case in 17th and 18th century Europe. For the
state officials were indispensable to running a major means of production—the
massive canal networks and irrigation works.28 This gave the Chinese
merchants little choice but to work with the state machine,29 even though that
state was absorbing an enormous proportion of the surplus and diverting it
from productive use—spending it on the luxury consumption of the court and
the top officials, and on bribing the border peoples.
This was a period of great prosperity for the gentry-officials and the rich
merchants alike.30 It was also a period of grinding poverty for the peasants. In
the 11th century Su Hsün wrote:
The rich families own big chunks of land…Their fields are tilled by hired
vagrants who are driven by whips and looked upon as slaves. Of the produce
of the land, half goes to the master and half to the tiller. For every landowner
there are ten tillers…The owner can clearly accumulate his half and become
rich and powerful, while the tillers must daily consume their half and fall into
poverty and starvation.31
The ‘Confucian’ ethics of the gentry-officials certainly did not extend to
those who toiled for them. Yüan Ts’ai’s Precepts For Social Life refers to
peasants and artisans as ‘lesser people’, speaks of ‘perversity on the part of
servants, their tendency to commit suicide’, suggests how they should be
beaten, and advises treating them as domesticated animals.32
The historian John Haegar writes, ‘By the end of the southern Sung, much
of the countryside had been impoverished by the same forces which had
sparked the agricultural and commercial revolution in the first place’.33
But before any symptoms of internal crisis could mature—and any clash of
interests between the merchants and the officials come to the fore—an external
crisis tore the state apart. In 1127 an invasion from the north cut China in half,
leaving the Sung in control only of the south. In 1271 the whole country fell to
a second invasion.
The first invasion did not fundamentally alter conditions in the north. The
conquerors, the Jürchen, were a people already organised in a state patterned
on Chinese lines and ran their half of China, the Chin Empire, with Chinese-
speaking officials. Effectively there were two Chinese empires for almost 150
years.
The second invasion was much more serious. It was by Mongol armies
which had spread out from their central Asian homeland in the previous
century to rampage west to central Europe and south into Arabia and India, as
well as east into China and Korea. Mongol society was dominated by military
aristocrats who owned vast nomadic herds. They were superb horsemen and
had the wealth to acquire up to date armour and armaments. The result was a
military combination that few armies could withstand.34 But they had little
administrative structure of their own. For this they depended upon the services
of peoples they had conquered.
In China the Mongol rulers called themselves the Yüan Dynasty and relied
upon sections of the old officialdom to run the empire. But, not trusting them,
they kept key positions in their own hands and contracted out the profitable
business of collecting taxes to Muslim merchants from central Asia, backed up
by military detachments. This broke apart the social arrangements that had
resulted from—and further encouraged—a level of technological and
economic advance such as the world had never known.
The economic problems that had been slowly growing in the Sung years,
especially the impoverishment of the countryside, now came to the fore. Prices
began to rise from the 1270s onwards. The poverty of the northern peasantry
was made worse by the further spread of big estates.
Chinese society continued to be advanced enough to amaze foreigners. It
was the Mongol court in Beijing that so impressed the Italian traveller Marco
Polo in 1275. The vast stretch of the Mongol presence from one end of Eurasia
to the other also played an important part in spreading knowledge of Chinese
technical advances to the less advanced societies of the west. But China itself
had lost its economic dynamism, and the poverty of the peasantry caused
repeated revolt, often led by religious sects or secret societies—the ‘White
Lotus’, the ‘White Cloud’, the ‘Red Turbans’. Finally, the son of an itinerant
agricultural worker who was a Red Turban leader, Chu Yüan-chang, took the
Mongol capital Beijing and proclaimed himself emperor in 1368.
There was a steady recovery from the devastation of the last Mongol years
under the new empire, known as the Ming. But there was no recovery of the
economic dynamism. The early Ming emperors consciously discouraged
industry and foreign trade in an effort to concentrate resources in agriculture,
so that they were less developed in the early 16th century than they had been in
the 12th. In the meantime, other parts of Eurasia had learned the techniques the
Chinese had pioneered, and had begun to build flourishing urban civilisations
of their own—and armies and navies to go with them.
Chapter 3
Byzantium: the living fossil
The collapse of the Roman Empire in western Europe was not the end of the
empire as such. Emperors who described themselves as Romans still reigned
in the city of Constantinople (present day Istanbul) 1,000 years after the Goths
sacked Rome. The empire today is usually called Byzantium, but the emperors
and their subjects regarded themselves as Romans, although their language was
Greek. Through much of that 1,000 years the splendour of Constantinople—
with its luxurious royal palaces, its libraries and public baths, its scholars
acquainted with the writings of Greek and Roman antiquity, its 300 churches
and its magnificent St Sophia cathedral—stood out as the one redoubt of
culture against the poverty, illiteracy, superstition and endless wars that
characterised the Christian lands of the rest of Europe.
Even in the 12th century, when western Europe was reviving,
Constantinople’s population was greater than that of London, Paris and Rome
combined. The city fascinated the elites of the neighbouring Muslim empires,
although ‘Baghdad, Cairo and Cordova [Cordoba] were each larger and more
populous than Constantinople’.35
Yet Byzantine civilisation added very little to humanity’s ability to make a
livelihood or to its knowledge in those 1,000 years. In every sphere it relied
on advances already known to the old Roman Empire—and already known to
the Greeks of the 5th century BC.
St Sophia cathedral,36 completed in the mid-6th century, was the most
magnificent building in Europe at the time. But it also marked the end of any
advance by Byzantine architects.37 The innovative techniques employed were
not used again, and later architects did not know how to keep it in full repair.
Byzantine literature was characterised by a deliberate rejection of originality,
with ‘a striving to emulate the style of classical models and to serve
scrupulously a set of pedantic rules…No literary value was attached to
originality of content, freedom of invention, or freedom in the choice of subject
matter’.38 The obsession with imitating the past meant the language of official
society was the ‘classic’ Greek of 1,000 years before, not the very different
version employed in the life of the city: ‘When making a formal speech, the
orator would shrink from referring to any object in everyday use by its familiar
name’.39 Byzantine art was characterised by ‘a process of continuous
limitation’ until it became nothing more than propaganda, either for the
imperial power or for the church.40
There were a few advances in technology. Alchemists stumbled upon new
methods for handling metals, although ‘scientific mineralogy was all but
destroyed by the superimposition of occult practices’.41 There were
improvements in the manufacture and handling of glass, and a microscrew
permitted accurate measurements. There were improvements in writing
materials, particular with the acquisition of knowledge from China on how to
make paper. The ‘Byzantines knew several simple machines (levers, rollers,
cog wheels, wedges, inclined planes, screws and pulleys) which were used
mainly as parts…of capstans, treadwheels, scooping machines, weightlifters
and catapults’.42 Yet these advances seem to have been employed only in two
limited fields—to provide luxuries for the ruling class (such as a mechanical
singing bird made by Leo the Mathematician for the royal court) and for
military purposes. Even in the military field, the Byzantines advanced very
little beyond the knowledge acquired in Alexandria a millennium earlier.
There was not even a limited advance in science. A few manuscripts
survived which detailed the discoveries in mathematics and astronomy of
Greek Alexandria, but only a handful of scholars ever took them seriously.
Mainstream thinkers relied on interpretations of the Book of Genesis in the
Bible for their understanding of the physical world and saw the world as flat,
not round.43
Above all, there seems to have been virtually no advance in the techniques
used to gain a livelihood by the vast majority of the population who worked on
the land. ‘The methods and instruments’ of cultivation ‘showed little or no
advance on ancient times’.44 Tilling was still performed by a light plough
pulled by oxen, fields were not manured systematically, and the harnesses
employed until the 12th century choked animals so that two horses could only
pull a load of about half a tonne—several times less than is possible with
modern harnesses. The result was that however hungry the peasants were, the
surplus available to maintain the state and provide for the luxuries of the ruling
class did not grow. This simple fact lay at the basis of the stagnation of so
much of the rest of Byzantine society. It had survived the crisis which
destroyed the old Roman Empire in the west. But no new ways of producing
had emerged and no new class which embodied those new ways. So it could
not escape the same pressures which had led to the great crisis of the west in
the 5th century.
The empire had survived in the east, basically because this was the area of
most abundant agriculture. After Constantinople became the imperial capital in
330, successive emperors were able to keep control of Asia Minor, Syria, the
Balkans and the all-important grain-producing Nile Valley—which now
supplied the needs of Constantinople as it had previously supplied Rome. The
economies of the empire’s provinces were in the hands of large local
landowners, running virtually self contained estates, which in Egypt ‘came to
resemble miniature kingdoms, equipped with police, courts of justice, private
armies and elaborate postal and transport services’.45 But the imperial army
was sufficiently powerful and tightly enough organised to keep them providing
the funds the empire needed.
This structure virtually collapsed barely 50 years after Justinian’s final
attempt to reconquer the west and the completion of St Sophia in the 6th
century. The armies, the spate of public building and the luxuries of the court
and church depended on all the wealth of the empire draining to the top. The
continued impoverishment of the peasants and discontent among the less
wealthy inhabitants of the provincial cities led to ‘savage clashes between
rival factions in all the cities of the empire’.46 The empire and the church
alienated vast numbers of people by their attempts to impose religious
conformism. The bishops, ‘backed by the violence of the monks’, ensured
‘Paganism was brutally demolished’ by attacks on temples.47 There were
repeated attacks on the Jews and bloody persecution of adherents of the
‘Monophysite’, ‘Arian’, and Nestorian interpretations of Christianity (which,
between them, had near-majority support). There was little support for the
empire when it was attacked in the early 7th century by Persian and then Arab-
Islamic armies in Syria and Egypt, and by Slav peoples in the Balkans. It was
reduced to a rump consisting of Constantinople itself and part of Asia Minor,
with a few towns, a much reduced population in the capital, and a general
decay in the level of literacy and learning.
The truncated empire was just able to survive because its rulers
reorganised the economy so as to provide for its defence. They attempted to
dismantle the large estates and to settle whole armies as smallholding peasants
in frontier areas. This system, they believed, would provide them both with
militias to defend the empire and with a sure tax base.
They were able to hold the core of the empire intact in this way and even,
by the 10th century, to recover some of the Balkan lands inhabited by the Slavs.
But they could not overcome the basic weaknesses of the system, and
Constantinople was in decline again by the mid-11th century. The empire
rested on an inbuilt contradiction. The aim was to build an independent
peasantry which could be taxed. But taxation continually drove the peasants to
abandon the land to those who were wealthier and more powerful.
The smallholding peasants faced ‘the annual invasion of a cruel and
rapacious body of tax collectors, accompanied by a posse of soldiers…
Defaulters were summarily flogged and their goods distrained’.48 Sometimes
they would be jailed and tortured—and in 12th century Cyprus hungry dogs
were set on them. Yet even in the best of times they lived on the edge of
insolvency. It only required a bad harvest for the most industrious peasants to
be forced to sell their land and flee. So peasants could end up welcoming
subordination to some powerful landowner as a form of ‘protection’.
Significantly, when there was a peasant rising in 932, it was led by an imposter
who claimed to be the son of a great aristocratic family.49
The imperial bureaucracy did succeed in preventing the urban masses ever
organising independently. The merchants and artisans were organised into
guilds under state control, which rigorously limited their profits. This ‘delayed
the growth of a strong native bourgeoisie’,50 so that when openings for trade
did emerge they were taken up by foreign merchants whose activities increased
the weaknesses of the empire.
A class of free wage labourers could not develop either, because of the
persistence of slavery in the cities. From the 9th to the 11th centuries, ‘the great
victories…flooded the markets with cheap human merchandise. It was not until
the hard facts of military defeat, closed markets and declining wealth had
stopped the sources of slaves in the 12th century that slavery began to die out
and give the free worker…economic power’.51
The other side of the splendour of Constantinople and the wealth of its
rulers was the poverty of masses of its inhabitants. Vast numbers lived in
squalid tenements or huts, with many sleeping outdoors even in the coldest
winters. But, lacking an independent economic base, the poor could not act as
an independent force. They could cause brief mayhem by rioting. But even their
bitterness was all too easily manipulated by groups with very different
interests to their own. So the huge ‘Nike’ riot early in Justinian’s reign, which
went on for a fortnight and led to the burning of half the city, was utilised by
aristocratic forces opposed to Justinian’s taxes on them. From then on
emperors were careful to provide cheap grain for the urban masses, and riots
were normally in favour of the emperor and against his enemies.
There was even an institutionalised form of rioting which deflected the
urban masses from raising class demands of their own. This was the
organisation into rival Green and Blue ‘factions’ of groups of spectators at the
various games in the Hippodrome arena. Several hundred youths from each
side would occupy special seats, dressed in elaborated clothes in their own
colours, cheering and booing appropriately and coming to blows, which
would, on occasions, lead to large-scale bloodshed and rioting. Troops would
sometimes have to be used to restore order, but the sponsorship of the factions
by various dignitaries, including the emperor and empress, ensured that far
from endangering the empire the system merely served to let off steam.52
It was only when the system of providing cheap corn broke down in the
12th century that riots reflecting the class interests of the urban dwellers began
to occur. Interestingly, it was then that various ‘guilds’ and associations of
artisans and tradesmen played a role.53
Byzantium survived as a last bastion of Graeco-Roman culture because the
imperial bureaucracy was run by a layer of literate Greek speakers. But it was
a group that lived off the production of others rather than contributing to or
organising it. It therefore prided itself on its remoteness from the material
world, and was afraid of any class emerging whose closeness to production
might lead to it diverting some of the surplus into its own pockets. It is this
which explains the sterile, pedantic character of Byzantine culture. It also
explains the strength of superstitious and magical beliefs among all social
groups. The priests were usually at least half-illiterate, and their message
relied upon simplified stories of the saints, tales of miracles, and faith in the
magic of holy relics. Where Paganism had provided people with local gods,
Christianity now provided them with local patron saints. The cult of the mother
goddess became the cult of the Virgin Mary. Fertility rights became Shrove
Tuesday carnivals and Easter ceremonies.
Along with the superstition went the most barbaric practices. By the 8th
century ‘we find mutilation of the tongue, hand and nose as part of the criminal
system…The church approved of this because the tongueless sinner still had
time to repent’.54 In the cities the austere moralism of the church meant there
was ‘rigorous seclusion of women. No respectable woman ever appeared in
the streets unveiled’.55 But there was also prostitution on a massive scale.
The fundamental weakness of Byzantine civilisation was shown early in
the 13th century when Constantinople fell to a band of thugs and adventurers
from Europe. The participants in the Fourth Crusade found the city a better
prize than their intended destination of Jerusalem. They pillaged it and then
ruled it as a feudal kingdom. They were driven out in 1261, but the renewed
Byzantine state was a pale reflection of its former self and finally fell to the
Ottoman Turks in 1453.
A certain sort of civilisation had been preserved for 1,000 years. But the
only contact of the supposedly cultivated ruling class with the masses who did
the work was via the tax collector on the one hand and the barely literate rural
priests on the other. Such a civilisation could be no more than a living fossil,
passing on the achievements of one epoch to another, but adding nothing itself.
No class capable of revolutionising society and giving a free rein to the
forces of production had ever developed in Graeco-Roman society. The Dark
Ages were the result in western Europe; 1,000 years of sterility were the result
in the Balkans and Asia Minor.
Chapter 4
The Islamic revolutions
The stagnation of Byzantium after Justinian’s time did not just lead to the
sterility of the rump Roman Empire. It also led to a series of dramatic
upheavals elsewhere in the Middle East which did contribute something to
humanity’s stock of knowledge and techniques—and also produced one of the
great world religions.
The starting point was the unlikely venue of Mecca, a trading town in the
generally barren lands of the Arabian peninsula. The area was dominated by
nomadic pastoralists who used the camel (domesticated about 1000 BC) to
travel from oasis to oasis with their herds, and to engage in a certain amount of
trade and looting. They were organised into clans, loosely linked in tribes run
by assemblies of clan elders, which fought each other and launched periodic
raids on settled peoples beyond the edge of the desert.
But there were also settled cultivators around the oases and in some of the
coastal regions—especially in the south,56 where there was a civilisation at
least 1,000 years old which maintained contact with the equally old Ethiopian
civilisation just across the Red Sea. Some of the nomadic families also began
to settle in trading centres as they acquired wealth, using camel caravans to
carry luxury goods between the Roman Empire and the eastern civilisations.
Mecca was one such settlement and had become a thriving town by the
beginning of the 7th century.
The traditional values of the nomadic clans centred on the courage and
honour of the individual man and his clan. There was no state, and obligations
were to one’s kin group, not to society at large. Assaults, murders and
robberies were regarded as infringements on the family or clan, to be dealt
with through retaliation and blood feuds. Religion was a matter of
identification with an individual deity which would travel with the tribal group
—rather as the Ark of the Covenant travelled with the ‘Children of Israel’ in
their Old Testament wanderings through the desert.
Such values did not provide any easy way to deal with tensions and
conflicts which arose as some of the nomads took to a settled life. Long-
established peasants and townspeople had long broken with them. Christianity
flourished in southern Arabia, and many oasis cultivators had converted to
Judaism or one of the varieties of Christianity. In a town like Mecca the
mingling of nomads, merchants, artisans and peasants was matched by
arguments between the different religious viewpoints. These were arguments
which had practical implications, since the old values and gods ruled out the
establishment of any single code of law or behaviour which overrode loyalty
to clan and tribe.
The crisis was heightened by what was happening in the two great empires
bordering on Arabia, Byzantium and Persia. Persia had briefly seized Egypt
and Syria from Byzantium at the end of the 6th century, bringing to an end 900
years of Graeco-Roman domination. But Persian society itself was in deep
crisis, caused by its landed aristocrats neglecting the Mesopotamian irrigation
systems that had allowed cities to flourish. The ravages of war made things
worse. In both empires there was mass impoverishment and social unrest.57
The whole world seemed to be in a state of chaos.
This was the world in which Mohammed, a Meccan orphan from one of the
less important trading families, grew up and attempted, not very successfully,
to make a living as a merchant. He experienced the chaos of the world around
him as mental turmoil, in which none of the conflicting worldviews and values
seemed to make sense. He felt driven to try to bring some coherence to his own
life and to the society in which he lived. He had a series of religious visions in
which he believed God (Allah in Arabic) spoke to him. These moulded the
various religious conceptions he had come across into a new pattern. He
recited the words to others, who wrote them down as the Koran, and gradually
built up a group of followers, mainly younger members of the different Meccan
merchant families.
The message Mohammed preached had much in common with the
Christianity and Judaism of the Arabic cultivators and townspeople. It opposed
a single god to the many competing gods of the nomadic herders. It substituted
belief in ‘universal’ obligations to all fellow believers for the old clan and
tribal codes. It appealed to the poor by praising protection against arbitrary
oppression, but did not spurn the rich providing they showed charity. It also,
like early Christianity, had a certain appeal to urban women (there were wives
in Mohammed’s group whose husbands were bitterly hostile to it). Although it
assumed women were inferior to men (accepting, for instance, the veiling of
women prevalent in the Byzantine Empire), it preached that men, as their
‘superiors’, had to respect rather than mistreat women, and it gave them certain
property rights.
Its purely religious aspect involved the incorporation of a range of biblical
myths and religious practices from both Jews and Christians. But in one
important respect the message differed from the versions of Christianity of the
time. It was not simply a set of beliefs or rules for moral behaviour. It was also
a political programme for reforming society, for replacing the ‘barbarism’ of
competition, often armed, between tribes and ruling families, with an ordered
umma community based on a single code of laws.
This political aspect of Mohammed’s teaching led to clashes with the
ruling families in Mecca, to the enforced emigration of his group to the town of
Medina, and to his eventual return with an army to Mecca in AD 630 to begin
to establish a new state. He was successful because he was able to build a
core of young men committed to a single worldview, while forming tactical
alliances with groups whose purpose was very different—with townspeople
and cultivators who merely wanted peace, with merchant families who
relished the profits a powerful Arab state would bring them, and with tribal
leaders hoping for loot from fighting for his cause.
The new state was well positioned to take advantage of the twin crises of
the great empires. Mohammed died in 632, but his first two successors, or
‘caliphs’, Abu Bakr and Umar—longtime disciples from merchant families—
also knew how to combine religious principle and political pragmatism. They
deflected the energies of feuding pastoralist tribes and clans into attacks on the
wealthy cities of the two great empires and in the process discovered how
weak those empires were. One by one their cities fell to Arab armies—
Damascus in 636, the Persian capital of Ctesiphon in 637, the Egyptian city
called Babylon (now part of Cairo) in 639, and Alexandria in 642. Within ten
years Mohammed’s followers had created a massive empire out of the lands of
the historic civilisations of the Middle East.
The successes were, in part, a result of very clever use of the fighting
potential of the pastoralist tribes. The Islamic commanders saw that, moving
through apparently impenetrable deserts at speed, cavalrymen on camels could
hit the cities in the bordering empires unexpectedly and with great force. They
could use the vast space of the desert much as the gunboats of the old British
Empire used the oceans, striking at will against defending armies which could
only move at a fraction of their speed,58 or as modern armed forces use
paratroops to hit distant objectives at will.59
But the successes were also a testimony to how hated the rulers of the old
empires were by their own peoples. The Jews and the ‘unorthodox’ Christians
who often made up the majority of the urban population welcomed the Arab
armies, especially as the Muslim conquerors did not at first seek to create new
state structures or convert populations to their religion. Rather, they left intact
the bulk of the old administrations and respected the beliefs of Christians,
Jews and Persian Zoroastrians alike. All that they demanded was the payment
of regular taxes as tribute, and the confiscation of lands belonging to the state
and those aristocrats who continued to resist their rule. The mass of the
population found conditions less oppressive than under the old empires.
A Jewish writer told how ‘the creator has brought the Kingdom of Ishmael
[ie the Arabs] in order to save you from wickedness’, while a Syriac Christian
historian said, ‘God…delivered us out of the hands of the Romans by means of
the Arabs…to be saved from the cruelty of the Romans and their bitter hatred
to us’.60
The immediate beneficiaries of the conquest were the leaders of the Arab
tribal armies and the leading families of Mecca. They shared the booty of
conquest between them, so that within a few years they constituted an Arab
aristocracy—an extremely wealthy but very thin upper caste, living in newly
built barrack towns on the edge of the desert, exacting tribute in the form of
taxes from the population, but leaving the existing landowners and officials to
run the lands of the old empires.
However, there was continual friction within the victorious armies, with
some of the Arab tribes feeling they had lost out in the distribution of the fruits
of victory. The frustrations grew in the 640s until they erupted into a civil war
which left its mark on the whole history of Islam. After the murder of the
second caliph, Umar, by a slave in 644, power had passed to Uthman, an early
supporter of Mohammed but also a member of the most powerful Meccan
merchant family. This further increased the bitterness. He was murdered in
656. The choice of Mohammed’s cousin and son in law Ali as caliph led to
open warfare between rival Muslim armies, until he was killed by some of his
own followers, known as the Khariyites, who objected to his attempts to
conciliate his opponents. Power passed to a cousin of Uthman, who
established a hereditary dynasty known as the Umayyads, after their family
name.
The victorious family was associated in many eyes with the vices which
Mohammed had preached against. Ali and his son Husein (murdered by an
Umayyad army in 680) became martyrs to all those who harked back to
Mohammed’s own time, regarding it as a model of purity that had since been
corrupted. Again and again in subsequent Islamic history the cry for a return to
the time of Ali or of the first two caliphs has been a call for revolt against the
existing state of affairs from one social group or another. It still motivates
many ‘Islamic fundamentalist’ organisations today.
For the time being, however, the Umayyads oversaw the consolidation of
the empire, establishing its capital in Syria. The Arab armies resumed their
advances to take Kabul and Bukhara in the east and to reach the Atlantic in the
west. This brought still more wealth to the Arab aristocracy of former tribal
leaders and former merchants. They lived in great luxury in the garrison cities,
spending vast sums on building palaces for themselves. Beneath them other
members of the Arab armies were exempt from taxes and received pensions
from the booty and tribute of conquest.
Urban classes and religious revolt
The unification of a vast area into a single empire gave an enormous boost to
the trade in luxuries. Merchants, shopkeepers, clerks and artisans flocked to
the garrison cities, settling in growing suburbs around their walls and
providing for the needs of the Arab rulers, their palaces, their armies and their
administrators. Mostly they were non-Arabs, but were attracted to the religion
of their rulers—which was, after all, not all that different from the
monotheistic religions that had dominated the old empires. But the Arab
Muslims were not keen to extend to newcomers their religious right to tax
exemption and a share in the tribute. So new converts were designated mawali
and excluded from the privileges of the Arabs, who regarded themselves as the
only genuine Muslims.
By the time the Arab Empire was a century old, the non-Arab Muslims
were the majority in the cities of the empire and the key to its industries and
trade, which the Arab merchants had abandoned to become a new aristocracy.
They were also of growing importance as administrators. But they were still
discriminated against.
Dissident Muslim groups who called themselves Shi’atu Ali, the party of
Ali (or Shi’ites for short), found a ready audience, as did the Kharijites who
believed Ali also had succumbed to compromise and corruption. Just as a
section of the urban classes in Mecca had once found in Mohammed’s teaching
a worldview which enabled them to fight against a disagreeable social order,
so now the urban classes found that teaching equally useful in the fight against
the state established by his lieutenants. It was a rallying cry for the creation of
a new order which would remove the oppression that cramped the further
development of those classes.
Some historians see the conflicts which arose as setting Persians against
Arabs.61 But in fact the Persian upper class supported the Umayyads, while the
discontented included many Arabs:
The surviving Persian aristocracy cooperated with the Arab state as long the
state recognised its privileges. On conversion it exchanged its Zoroastrian for
a Muslim orthodoxy. The Islamised Persian townfolk and peasants exchanged
their Zoroastrian for Islamic heresies directed against the aristocracy, both
Arab and Persian.62
As class tensions increased, there were a series of revolts headed by
various mahdis (‘guided ones’), who preached the birth of a new religious and
social order. These were defeated. But then in the mid-8th century there was
renewed quarrelling among the leaders of the Arab armies.
A descendent of Mohammed’s family along the ‘Hashemite’ line, Abu-I-
Abbas, exploited the situation for his own advantage. He gave the go-ahead to
one of his family’s freed slaves, Abu Muslim, to undertake religious and social
agitation in south western Persia. Abu Muslim worked in secret, building
support until conditions were ripe for a popular rising. One after another the
west Persian cities declared their support by raising the Abbasid banner—
which was black, a colour associated with the millenarian groups. Abu
Muslim marched to the Euphrates, where he defeated a major Umayyad army.
Such ‘extensive and successful revolutionary propaganda’ paved the way for
Abu-I-Abbas to defeat the Umayyads, put the whole family to death and
establish a new dynasty, the Abbasids.63 Those of the poor who expected
liberation were soon disappointed. The Abbasid rulers quickly turned on their
own ‘extremist’ supporters, executing Abu Muslim and several of his
companions. Yet this was more than just a change of dynasty.
In his history of Islam, Bernard Lewis goes so far as to claim it was ‘a
revolution in the history of Islam as important…as the French or Russian
revolutions in the history of Europe’.64 Some historians even refer to it as a
‘bourgeois revolution’.64a Certainly, the Abbasids used the mobilisation of
mass discontent to push through a complete reorganisation of imperial rule.
Previously the empire had been run by an exclusively Arab military
aristocracy, whose origins lay in war and conquest for tribute. Under the
Abbasids, Islam became a genuinely universal religion in which Arab and non-
Arab believers were increasingly treated the same and in which ethnic origins
were not central—although there were still rich and poor. There was a ‘new
social order based on a peace economy of agriculture and trade and with a
cosmopolitan ruling class of officials, merchants, bankers and the ulama, the
class of religious scholars, jurists, teachers and dignitaries’.65 Symbolic of the
change was the shift in the court to a grandiose new capital, Baghdad, in the
most fertile irrigated area of Mesopotamia and on an important trade route to
India, only a few miles from the ruins of the old Persian capital, Ctesiphon.
The Abbasid revolution opened the way to a century or more of economic
advance. The great river valleys of Mesopotamia and the Nile flourished,
producing wheat, barley, rice, dates and olives. The imperial rulers repaired
the irrigation canals of Mesopotamia, and crop yields seem to have been
high.66 Cotton cultivation, introduced from India, spread all the way from
eastern Persia to Spain. The trade of the empire was vast. Merchants travelled
to India, Sri Lanka, the East Indies and China, giving rise to the settlements of
Arab merchants in the south China cities. Trade also extended from the Black
Sea up the Volga into Russia—with hoards of Arab coins found even in
Sweden—through Ethiopia and the Nile Valley into Africa and, via Jewish
merchants, into western Europe.
Alongside the expansion of trade there was the emergence of something
approaching a banking system. Banks with head offices in Baghdad had
branches in other cities of the empire, and there was an elaborate system of
cheques and letters of credit,67 which did away with merchants having to carry
large sums of gold or silver from one end of the empire to the other. It was
possible to draw a cheque in Baghdad and cash it in Morocco. Koranic
injunctions against lending money for interest meant that many bankers were
Christians or Jews—although, as Maxime Rodinson has pointed out, Islamic
businessmen were not slow in finding ways around the rule.68
Artisan-based industries also flourished—mainly textiles, but also pottery,
metalwork, soap, perfumes and paper making (learned from China). The
flourishing of commercial life and the cities was reflected in literature and
thought, where the ‘upright merchant’ was held ‘as the ideal ethical type’.69
The famous stories of the Arabian Nights portray ‘the life of a bourgeoisie of
tradesmen and artisans with its upper layer of wealthy businessmen, corn
merchants, tax farmers, importers and absentee gentlemen farmers’.70
It was in this period that religious scholars began compiling authoritative
collections of the sayings of Mohammed (the ‘Hadiths’) and formal codes of
Islamic law (the ‘Shariah’). Today these codes are often presented in the West
as expressions of pure barbarism as opposed to the allegedly ‘humane’ and
‘civilised’ values of some ‘Judao-Christian tradition’. But in the 9th and 10th
centuries the codes represented, in part, the values of traders and artisans who
sought to free themselves from the arbitrary rule of imperial officialdom and
landed aristocrats—and did so in ways that stood in marked contrast to what
prevailed in ‘Christian’ Byzantium, let alone in the developing feudal system of
western Europe. As one scholarly history of Islam puts it, the Shariah law was
built on ‘egalitarian expectations of relative mobility…which maintained its
autonomy as against the agrarian empires’. Tradesmen and artisans could look
to ‘the reconstitution of the whole society on more openly structured, more
egalitarian and contractual bases, appealing to Islam for legitimation’.71
Overall this was one of those periods of history in which the clashes of
values produced by rapid changes in society led to a flourishing of intellectual
inquiry. There was not yet a single orthodox interpretation of Islam, and rival
schools battled for people’s minds. The lower classes of the towns were
attracted to the various Shia heresies—views which repeatedly led to
attempted revolts against the empire. Meanwhile poets, scholars and
philosophers flocked to Baghdad from all parts of the empire, hoping to
receive the patronage of some wealthy courtier, landowner or merchant. They
translated into Arabic the works of Greek, Persian, Syriac (the language of
ancient Syria) and Indian philosophy, medicine and mathematics. Philosophers
such as al-Kindi, al-Farabi and Ibn Sina (usually known in the west as
Avicenna) sought to provide a rational account of the world, building on the
ideas of Plato and Aristotle. Mathematicians such as al-Khwarazmi, al-Buzjani
and al-Biruni combined and developed the heritage of Greece and India.
Astronomers constructed astrolabes and sextants and measured the
circumference of the Earth.
Parasites and paralysis
The Muslim Empire certainly provided a sharp contrast, not just to Dark Age
Europe but also to stagnating Byzantium. Yet it suffered from grave faults
which meant it never matched the dynamism, innovation and technical advance
of China.
First, the flourishing town life and culture was not matched by a
corresponding advance in the techniques of production. The Abbasid
revolution created space for the expansion of trade and enabled the urban
middle classes to influence the functioning of the state. But real power
remained with groups which were still essentially parasitic on production
carried out by others. The royal court increasingly adopted the traditional
trappings of an oriental monarchy, with vast expenditures designed to feed the
egos of its rulers and to impress their subjects. State officials expected to make
enormous fortunes from bribes and by diverting state revenues into their own
pockets. Even merchants who enriched themselves by trade would see
speculation in land ownership or tax farming as more fruitful than investment in
improving production.
The urban industries were overwhelmingly based on small-scale
production by individual artisans. There was little development of bigger
workshops using wage labour, except in a few industries run by the state rather
than by private entrepreneurs. It was not long before state officials were
encroaching on the profits from trade too. Their attempts to control speculation
in vital foodstuffs expanded into efforts to monopolise trade in certain
commodities for themselves.
The advances in the countryside during the first few Abbasid decades soon
disappeared. Once the irrigation systems had been restored to their old level,
there was a tendency for the state funds needed to maintain them to be diverted
to other purposes and other pockets. Land increasingly passed into the hands of
large landowners only interested in the short term profits needed to maintain an
ostentatious lifestyle in Baghdad. They exerted ever-greater pressure on the
cultivators and introduced slave labour on the large estates. As in ancient
Rome, peasants not only lost their land but also saw the market for waged
labour contract. And the slaves did not share the interest of the peasant
proprietor in the long term fertility of the soil.
An ever more elaborate ruling class ‘superstructure’ weighed increasingly
heavily on a countryside in which production ceased to rise. As an important
study of agriculture in successive Mesopotamian civilisations notes, the
dominant urban classes ‘exhibited little concern for agricultural advancement.
Instead, their preoccupation with court intrigues and corruption, and their
involvement in civil wars, further sapped the resources of the peasantry. Short
sighted attempts to maintain or enlarge tax revenues through corrupt and
predatory tax farming practices further aggravated conditions’.72
Natural conditions—especially the harm that salination (salt deposits)
could do to the soil—meant that even with the most careful tending it would
have been difficult to raise the output of the land much above the levels
achieved centuries before. Now neglect led to devastating collapse. There was
a ‘cessation of cultivation and settlement in what had once been the most
prosperous areas under the control of the caliphate’.73 By the early 13th
century an observer could report:
All is now in ruins, and all its cities and villages are mounds…None of the
sultans was interested in construction and building. Their only aim was to
collect taxes and consume them.74
The economic decline of its heartland resulted in a political fragmentation
of the Islamic Empire, which further encouraged the economic decline. As
revenues from the land fell, the imperial court tried increasingly to finance
itself at the expense of the merchants and handed responsibility for the finances
of the provinces to governors, who rewarded themselves from the proceeds. It
was not long before the governors were virtually independent in their own
regions.
At the same time, attempts by the caliphs to reduce their dependence on
potentially rebellious Arab troops backfired. Turkish peoples from central
Asia increasingly acted as mercenaries or as mamlukes—privileged groups of
slaves fulfilling military functions for the imperial household. Over time, the
leaders of such troops became powerful enough to make and break the caliphs
themselves, until the caliphs were no more than a nominal presence
formalising decisions made by others.
By the 11th century the empire had fallen apart. Spain, Morocco and
Tunisia had long been separate kingdoms. Eastern Persia was ruled by
dynasties which owed no more than titular respect to the caliphs in Baghdad.
Insurgents belonging to the Ismaili fragment of Shi’ism had established a rival
caliphate over Egypt, Syria, western Arabia and the Sind region of India. Their
newly built capital, Cairo, with its magnificent Al Azhar mosque, rivalled
Baghdad as a centre of Islam in the 11th century, and their government was a
focus for the revolutionary aspirations of dissident Muslims all the way from
Egypt to Samarkand—although in time it faced a revolt by its own dissident
Ismailis, which gave rise to the Druze sect that still survives in Lebanon.
The fragmentation of the Islamic world did not, in itself, lead to immediate
overall economic or cultural collapse. Baghdad declined and was eventually
sacked by a Mongol army in 1258, but Egypt continued to prosper for two
centuries, and Islamic culture flourished as scholars found rival courts
competing to sponsor their efforts all the way from Cordoba in the west to
Samarkand and Bukhara in the east.
Many of the problems which had beset the empire were soon afflicting its
successor states. They flourished because they were capable, for a period, of
putting an existing productive mechanism back to work and of engaging in long
distance trade. This was not the same as applying new methods of production
that could raise society as a whole to a higher level. In Egypt the economies of
the prosperous administrative and trading cities of Alexandria and Cairo were
still parasitic on the villages of the Nile Valley and Delta. Food and other raw
materials flowed in from the countryside as taxes to the rulers and rents to the
landholders. But little in the way of more advanced tools or help in improving
production flowed back from the cities to the villages, where life was barely
different to what it had been 1,000 years before. Eventually this parasitism
was bound to undermine the economies of the cities themselves. By the 12th
century parts of the Egyptian domain were weak enough to fall prey to the
Crusaders, a bunch of robbers gathered under the direction of religious fanatics
and coming from a western Europe with a lower level of civilisation than the
Islamic empires. The Crusaders’ successes were testimony to the first
advances of western Europe out of its backwardness at a time when the Middle
East was stagnating. In the next century only a seizure of power by the leaders
of the mamlukes, the Turkish military slaves, stopped Egypt falling, like
Persia, to the Mongols.
By this time the great period of Islamic culture and science was over. As
Islam increasingly penetrated the countryside—for centuries it had been a
mainly urban creed—it became dependent on the popularity of ‘Sufi’
movements of ascetics and mystics, some of whom were venerated after death
as ‘saints’. In effect, a hierarchy of magical and miraculous lesser gods was
reintroduced into what was a supposedly monotheistic religion. Rational
debate became a thing of the past as a system of religious schools, the
Madrasas, taught a single orthodoxy—especially directed against the Shia
heresies—and a religious establishment sought to impose it on society as a
whole. Learning came to mean knowing the Koran and the Hadiths rather than
developing an understanding of the world. This increasingly stifled
independent thought and scientific advance. By the beginning of the 12th
century the poet and mathematician Umar Khayyam could complain of ‘the
disappearance of the men of learning, of whom only a handful are left, small in
number but large in tribulations’75—although the Arabic cities of Spain
remained a beacon of learning for scholars from 13th century Europe, and it
was there that Ibn Khaldun developed ideas in the 14th century which
anticipated the findings of the French and Scottish thinkers of the 18th century
Enlightenment.76
The rise of Islamic civilisation in the 7th and 8th centuries was due to the
way that the Arab armies and then the Abbasid revolution united an area from
the Atlantic to the Indus behind a doctrine which made the trader and the
artisan as important as the landowner and the general. It was this which had
enabled products, technical innovations, artistic techniques and scientific
knowledge to travel from one end of Eurasia to the other and real additions to
be made to the heritage of the ancient empires of Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece
and Rome, of classical India and of contemporary China. But by the same
token, the decline of Islamic civilisation from the 10th century on was due to
the limitations of the Abbasid revolution. In reality it was only a half-
revolution. It allowed the traders and artisans to influence the state, but it did
not give them control over it.
Balancing between the urban classes and the great landowning classes, the
state machine became all-powerful. It sucked in taxes from all classes,
rewarded its generals and bureaucrats with vast estates, absorbed the surplus
which might otherwise have been used to develop the productive base of
society, and eventually drove vast numbers of the peasant producers below the
level of subsistence necessary for them to keep toiling, so that total output
sank. This in turn restricted the market for the merchants and manufacturers,
giving them little incentive to move from reliance on artisan production to
some rudimentary factory system. There was a cramping of further
technological advance—even printing was not introduced into the Muslim
world, although merchants who had been to China knew about it—and the mass
of people remained sunk in poverty and superstition. Civilisation was
restricted to a relatively thin layer of the population, and it began to wilt as the
economic conditions that sustained them deteriorated.
The Islamic empires were repeatedly shaken by revolts—rebellions by
those who identified with the murdered revolutionary leader Abu Muslim,
rebellions by those who saw one or other descendant of Ali as representing a
pure Islam corrupted by the caliphs, rebellions by townspeople, rebellions by
peasants, the great 16 year Zanj rebellion of black slaves in the southern salt
marshes of Mesopotamia in the 9th century,77 and the Ismaeli rebellion that
brought to power the rival caliphate in Egypt.
Yet none of these rebellions was any more capable of showing a way out
of the impasse than the revolts of ancient Rome or the peasant revolutions in
China. They gave expression to enormous discontent, usually in a religious
form. But they did not and could not begin to present a project for reorganising
society on a new basis. The means by which the mass of people made a
livelihood had not advanced enough for that to be possible.
The Islamic civilisation, like that of the T’ang and Sung periods in China,
was important in producing the seeds of further development. But the crushing
weight of old superstructures prevented those seeds taking root—until they
were transplanted to a primitive region of Eurasia where such a superstructure
barely existed.
Chapter 5
The African civilisations
The European colonists of the 19th and early 20th centuries described Africa
as ‘the Dark Continent’. According to them it was without civilisation and
without history, its life ‘blank, uninteresting, brutal barbarism’, according to a
Professor Egerton of Oxford University.78 So strong were their prejudices that
the geologist Carl Mauch, one of the first Europeans to visit the site of the 12th
century city of Great Zimbabwe, was convinced it could not be of local origin,
but must of been built by some non-black people from the north as a copy of
Solomon’s temple in Jerusalem.79 The Tory historian Hugh Trevor-Roper
wrote in 1965, ‘There is only the history of the European in Africa. The rest is
largely darkness’.80
Yet all the processes which led to the rise of civilisation in Eurasia and the
Americas occurred in Africa too, and not just once but several times. Egypt is
the most obvious example. Although certain aspects of its civilisation were
probably influenced by contact with Mesopotamia, its roots lay in independent
developments in southern Egypt, among peoples from the west and south who
settled in the Nile Valley.81 The Greek historian Herodotus referred to the
Kushite civilisation of Nubia (from the Nile above Aswan), which briefly
conquered Egypt early in the first millennium BC, and which developed its
own phonetic script. The Romans knew of the Axum civilisation of Ethiopia,
which embraced Christianity early on, was in close contact with southern
Arabia (some of Mohammed’s early followers fled there to avoid persecution
in Mecca) and also developed its own alphabet. Traders from India, the
Muslim empires and even China were in contact with cities all along the east
African coast south to Mozambique. One of them, Ibn Battuta, described Kilwa
in present-day Tanzania in 1331 as ‘one of the most beautiful and well
constructed towns in the world’.82 Hasan al-Wazzan (better known by his
Italian nickname Leo Africanus), an exiled Moor from Granada, described
crossing the Sahara from Morocco to visit some two dozen kingdoms along the
River Niger in the early 15th century. He wrote that Tambo (Timbuktu) was a
city of many thousands of people, with ‘many magistrates, learned doctors and
men of religion’, where ‘there is a big market for manuscript books from the
Berber countries, and more profit is made from the sale of books than from any
other merchandise’.83 Other civilisations arose in the forests of coastal west
Africa, where the city of Benin made an enormous impression on the first
Portuguese to visit it, and across a wide belt of central Africa from the
kingdom of the Kongo in northern Angola to Buganda in present day Uganda.
The sequence by which each of these civilisations arose is essentially the
same as that which occurred in the case of the Eurasian and American
civilisations. In particular regions people evolved forms of cultivation which
provided them with a sufficient surplus for there to be the beginnings of a
polarisation within old communal structures between chiefly lineages and
others. Then some of these chiefly lineages crystallised into ruling classes
which exploited the rest of society, while among the mass of the population
specialised groups of artisans and traders emerged alongside the mass of
peasants and herders.
Sometimes these developments received a push from the impact of other
civilisations. Egypt clearly influenced Nubia; southern Arabia (where towns
already existed in 1000 BC) probably influenced Ethiopia just across the Red
Sea; Indian and Arab traders had an impact on the east African coast. But this
could only happen because tendencies had already arisen independently,
capable of taking advantage of such influence. Traders only visited places such
as the east coast because there were already complex societies with something
to trade.
The most important changes in the ways the various peoples of Africa
made a livelihood occurred completely independently of outside influences.
This had to apply to the domestication of plants, if only because the crops
grown in the ancient civilisations of Eurasia and the Nile Valley would not
grow in the tropical and subtropical climates of most of sub-Saharan Africa.
African peoples developed forms of agriculture of their own. It also applied,
much later, to the production of iron. Metalsmiths in west Africa learned to
smelt iron ores about the same time as knowledge of how to do so was
spreading across Eurasia in about 1000 BC. But the techniques they used were
rather different, indicating independent development.84
Agriculture and iron together transformed the face of sub-Saharan Africa.
The number of Bantu-speaking peoples from west Africa, who first adopted
these methods, grew over the centuries, leading them between 2000 BC and
AD 500 to displace many of the hunter-gatherers who had originally been
predominant in central and southern Africa. Those peoples with a substantial
agricultural surplus or well positioned for trade began to undergo the transition
to class divisions and town living, usually at some point after AD 500. Trade
brought the east coast towns into contact with the other civilisations of the
Indian Ocean. The west African towns became part of a network of trade
which stretched to the Nile and Egypt on the one hand and through the Sahara
to the Maghreb. Such contacts enabled them to shortcut the long process of
developing their own script by adopting that of the Arabs—and with it the
Islamic religion, which fitted the atmosphere of urban life more than the old
‘pagan’ beliefs.
Indigenous developments had produced, in order, the Egyptian, Nubian and
Ethiopian civilisations. By the 15th century other civilisations existed right
across the continent, from coast to coast, even if sometimes interspersed with
so called ‘primitive’ peoples living in pre-class societies. They were
connected to the world system of trade via Islam long before Europeans landed
on their coasts (indeed, one explanation of the decline of ancient Zimbabwe
lies in an international decline in the price of the gold it exported in the 15th
century).85
The peoples of Africa did end up as the victims of the emerging world
system—so much so that their civilisations were all but erased from the
historical record by a racist ideology that treated them as ‘subhuman’. But the
reasons lie in an accident of geography.
Eurasia stretches from west to east. There are vast belts of land which
share essentially the same climate and, therefore, are suitable for growing the
same sort of crops—wheat, barley and rye grow all the way from Ireland to
Beijing, and rice grows from Korea and Japan to the Indian Ocean. There are
also few natural barriers preventing the spread of domesticated animal
species. Horses, cows, sheep and goats can thrive virtually anywhere, apart
from the occasional desert region. So advances in farming could spread
relatively rapidly, since they involved people learning from neighbours who
farmed under similar conditions. Successive hordes of humans were also able
to sweep from one end of the continental mass to the other, sometimes bringing
destruction, as with the Huns or Mongols, but also bringing knowledge of new
techniques.
By contrast, Africa runs from north to south and has several different
climatic belts. Crops which flourish in the Maghreb or in Egypt will not grow
easily in the savannah region, while crops which will grow there are useless in
the tropical region towards the equator.86 Therefore, local improvements in
farming techniques were rarely of more than regional importance until
revolutionary new methods of transport enabled them to leap climatic barriers.
There was also a huge natural barrier to the southward spread of cattle rearing
—the tsetse fly in the central African region. Farming folk with domesticated
cows had great difficulty reaching the lands in southern Africa which were
ideally suited to cattle. Deep sea navigation was impossible from the west
coast until the 15th century, because nowhere in the world had the naval
technology to cope with prevailing winds. The east coast was easily
accessible, but it was not easy for people to make the journey up into the
highlands inland. And the Sahara, cutting the continent in two from the Atlantic
to the Nile, was an obstacle to all but the most determined travellers even after
the introduction of the domesticated camel in about AD 500.
Backward peoples in Europe—such as the British, the Germans or the
Scandinavians—could eventually, even in the Dark Ages, gain knowledge of
technical innovations and agricultural improvements from China, India or the
Middle East. They could feed off advances made right across the world’s
greatest land mass. The civilisations of sub-Saharan Africa had to rely much
more on their own resources. They were relatively isolated, in a continent half
the size and with about one sixth of the population of Eurasia. It was not an
insuperable barrier to the development of society, as the record of successive
civilisations shows. But it placed them at a fatal disadvantage when eventually
they were confronted by rapacious visitors from the formerly backward region
of western Europe, which had been more easily able to borrow and develop
technologies from the other end of Asia.
Chapter 6
European feudalism
Merchants from the great Islamic cities such as Cairo and Cordoba travelled
widely 1,000 years ago.87 Any who made their way to the royal courts of
northern Europe must have been shaken by the conditions they found.
The land was divided between warring baronies, often separated from
each other by dense woodlands or marshes. Each was a virtually self
contained economy, its people depending almost entirely on what was
produced on its lands. For the peasants this meant a diet dominated by bread
and gruel, and clothing spun and woven in their own homes out of rough wool
or flax. It also meant devoting at least two fifths of their energies to unpaid
work for the lord, either in the form of labour or goods in kind. As serfs, the
peasants did not have the freedom to leave either the land or the lord.
The living standard of the lordly family was much higher, yet it too was
restricted to what the peasants could produce. The lords’ castles were crude,
built of wood and surrounded by wood and mud palisades, ill protected
against the elements. Their clothing, much more abundant than the peasants’,
was hardly any smoother on the skin, and the lords were rarely more cultured.
They needed expertise in horseriding and the use of weapons to hold their
lands against other lords and to punish recalcitrant peasants; they did not need
to be able to read and write, and most did not bother to learn. When the lords
with larger estates wanted to keep written records, they turned to the small
social group which had preserved the knowledge of reading and writing—the
thin layer of literate monks and clergy.
There were a few products—salt, iron for plough tips, knives and the
lords’ weapons—which came from traders. But these were very different from
the wealthy merchant classes of the eastern civilisations, being akin to bagmen
or tinkers as they tramped through forest paths and along barely recognisable
mud-caked roads.
There were few towns, and ‘entire countries, like England and almost all
the Germanic lands, were entirely without towns’.88 The towns that did exist
were little more than administrative centres for the bigger barons or religious
establishments, and were made up of a few houses clustered around a castle,
monastery or large church.
Yet this most backward extremity of the great Eurasian continent was
eventually to become the birthplace of a new civilisation which would
overwhelm all the rest.
There have been all sorts of explanations for this transformation, ranging
from the wondrous, through the absurd, to the obscene. Some ascribe it to the
‘Judaeo-Christian’ tradition, although the Christian side of this certainly did
not show any merits during the last years of the Roman Empire, the Dark Ages
in Europe or the stagnation of Byzantium. Others ascribe it to the climate which
allegedly encourages ‘work’ and ‘enterprise’,89 which makes one wonder how
the first great civilisations were able to flourish. The obscene attempt to
explain it in terms of the alleged ‘racial’ superiority of the Europeans falls at
the first hurdle given that they were backward for so long. Another line of
thinking ascribes the rise of Europe to ‘contingent’ factors—in other words, it
was an accident. There was the fortuitous emergence of a series of great men,
according to traditional mainstream history; there was the lucky rise of
Calvinism and the ‘Protestant ethic’, according to followers of the German
sociologist Max Weber; there was the chance outcome of clashes between
peasants and lords in 15th century England which left neither victorious,
according to some North American academics.90
The backward go forward
All these accounts miss an obvious point. Europe’s very backwardness
encouraged people to adopt new ways of wresting a livelihood from
elsewhere. Slowly, over many centuries, they began to apply techniques
already known in China, India, Egypt, Mesopotamia and southern Spain. There
was a corresponding slow but cumulative change in the social relations of
society as a whole, just as there had been in Sung China or the Abbasid
caliphate. But this time it happened without the enormous dead weight of an
old imperial superstructure to smother continued advance. The very
backwardness of Europe allowed it to leapfrog over the great empires.
Economic and technical advance was not automatic or unhampered. Again
and again old structures hindered, obstructed and sometimes crushed new
ways. As elsewhere, there were great revolts which were crushed, and
movements which promised a new society and ended up reproducing the old.
Fertile areas were turned into barren wastes and prosperous cities ended up as
desolate ruins. There were horrific and pointless wars, barbaric torture and
mass enslavement. Yet in the end a new organisation of production and society
emerged very different to anything before in history.
The first changes were in cultivation. Those who lived off the land during
the Dark Ages may have been illiterate, superstitious and ignorant of the wider
world. But they knew where their livelihood came from and were prepared,
slowly, to embrace new methods of cultivation that enabled them more easily
to fill their bellies if they got the chance. In the 6th century a new design of
plough, ‘the heavy wheeled plough’ capable of coping with heavy but fertile
soil, appeared among the Slav people of eastern Europe and spread westwards
over the next 300 years.91 With it came new methods of grazing, which used
cattle dung to fertilise the land. Together they allowed a peasant family to
increase its crop yield by 50 percent in ‘an agrarian pattern which produced
more meat, dairy produce, hides and wool than ever before, but at the same
time improved the harvest of grain’.92 One economic historian claims, ‘It
proved to be the most productive agrarian method, in relation to manpower,
that the world had ever seen’.93
There were still more new techniques in the centuries which followed,
such as the adoption of the central Asian method of harnessing horses—which
allowed them to replace the much slower oxen in ploughing—and the use of
beans and other legumes to replenish the soil. According to the noted French
historian of the medieval peasantry, Georges Duby, the cumulative effect of
these innovations was to double grain yields by the 12th century.94
Such changes took place slowly. Sylvia Thrupp has suggested that ‘the best
medieval rates of general economic growth…would come to perhaps half of
one percent’.95 Nevertheless, over 300 or 400 years this amounted to a
transformation of economic life.
Such advance depended to a very large extent on the ingenuity of the
peasant producers. But it also required something else—that the feudal lords
allowed a portion of the surplus to go into agricultural improvement rather than
looting it all. The barons were crude and rapacious men. They had acquired
and held their land by force. Their wealth depended on direct compulsion
rather than buying and selling, and they wasted much of it on luxuries and
warfare. But they still lived on their estates; they were not a class of absentee
owners like those of late republican Rome or the final years of Abbasid
power. Even the most stupid could grasp that they would have no more to live
on and fight with if they stole so much from the peasants that next year’s crops
were not sown. As the German economic historian Kriedte has pointed out,
‘The lord had to preserve the peasant holding at all costs,’ and ‘therefore…to
assist peasants in emergencies which arose from harvest failures and other
causes’.96 Providing the peasants with improved ploughs meant a bigger
surplus for luxury consumption and warfare, and some lords ‘put farming tools
made of iron, especially the ploughs, under their protection’.97 Individual
feudal lords organised and financed the clearing of new lands throughout the
feudal period. They were the driving force in the spread of the first and, for a
long time, the most important form of mechanisation, the water mill.
Like other ruling classes, the feudal lords were concerned above all with
exploitation. They would use unpaid peasant labour to build a mill, force the
peasants to grind their corn in it—and charge them for doing so. But for a
certain period of history, their concern with increasing the level of exploiation
also led some of them to encourage advances in the means of production.
The feudal ruling class did not consist solely of warrior barons. Many of
the great landholdings were in the hands of religious institutions—abbeys and
monasteries: ‘In wealth, power and aptitude for command…abbots, bishops
and archbishops…were the equals of the great military barons…Immense
fortunes were amassed by monastic communities or prelates’.98 On occasions
the literacy of monks was used to gain access to writings on technology from
Greece and Rome and from the Byzantine and Arabic empires: ‘If one is
looking for the earliest mills, water mills or windmills, or for progress in
farming techniques, one often sees the religious orders in the vanguard’.99
The full adoption of new techniques involved a change in relations
between lords (whether warrior or religious) and cultivators. The great
landholders finally had to abandon the wasteful Roman practice of slave
labour—a practice that lingered on as late as the 10th century. Then they began
to discover advantages in ‘serfdom’, in parcelling out land to peasant
households in return for a share of the produce. The serfs had an incentive for
working as hard as they could and employing new techniques on their holdings.
As total output rose, the lords’ incomes also rose, especially as they used their
military might to force previously free peasants into serfdom. What Bois calls
‘the transformation of the year 1000’ spelt the final end of agricultural slavery
—and the final establishment of feudal serfdom as a more dynamic mode of
production than the old Roman system.100
The importance of what happened in the countryside between about 1000
and 1300 is all too easily underrated by those of us for whom food is
something we buy from supermarkets. A doubling of the amount of food
produced by each peasant household transformed the possibilities for human
life across Europe. Whoever controlled the extra food could exchange it for the
goods carried by the travelling traders or produced by the artisans.
Crudely, grain could be changed into silk for the lord’s family, iron for his
weapons, furnishing for his castle, wine and spices to complement his meal. It
could also be turned into means that would further increase the productivity of
the peasant cultivators—wooden ploughs with iron tips, knives, sickles, and,
in some cases, horses with bridles, bits and iron shoes.
By supplying such things at regular markets the humble bagman could
transform himself into a respectable trader, and the respectable trader into a
wealthy merchant. Towns began to revive as craftsmen and traders settled in
them, erecting shops and workshops around the castles and churches. Trading
networks grew up which tied formerly isolated villages together around
expanding towns and influenced the way of life in a wide area.101 To obtain
money to buy luxuries and arms, lords would encourage serfs to produce cash
crops and substitute money rents for labour services or goods in kind. Some
found an extra source of income from the dues they could charge traders for
allowing markets on their land.
Life in the towns was very different from life in the countryside. The
traders and artisans were free individuals not directly under the power of any
lord. There was a German saying, ‘Town air makes you free.’ The urban
classes were increasingly loath to accept the prerogatives of the lordly class.
Traders and artisans who needed extra labour would welcome serfs who had
fled bondage on nearby estates. And as the towns grew in size and wealth they
acquired the means to defend their independence and freedom, building walls
and arming urban militias.
The civilisation of the 13th century
In time, every aspect of society changed. The classic account of European
feudalism by the French historian Marc Bloch goes so far as to speak of a
‘second feudal age’, in which relations between the feudal lords themselves
underwent a transformation. Kings became more influential. They were able to
formalise their power at the top of hierarchies of feudal lords. By granting
various towns internal self government they could use them as a counterweight
to the barons. And they tried to set up national networks of courts where their
officials rather than the barons administered ‘justice’—although the barons
usually managed to remain all-powerful in matters affecting their own estates.
Intellectual life was also tranformed. The traders needed to keep accounts
and written records of contracts in a way which the feudal lords of the earlier
period had not. They also wanted formal, written laws rather than the ad hoc
judgments handed down in the villages by the lords. Some took the effort to
learn to read and write, and did so in the local idioms they spoke. Literacy was
no longer confined to the monasteries and Latin ceased to be the only written
language. Learning moved from the monasteries to new universities established
in cities like Paris, Oxford and Prague, and scholars could now earn a
livelihood away from the direct control of church authorities by teaching for
money. They showed a new interest in the serious study of non-religious works
of the Greek and Roman world, travelling to Sicily, Moorish Spain or even
Syria to gain access to them through Arabic translations.102 They began to
dispute with each other over the merits of Plato and Aristotle, and of the
Islamic Aristotelian, Averroës.
Medieval thought is often associated with ‘scholasticism’—disputation for
its own sake, based upon hair-splitting references to texts. But the first phase
of the new thought was far from scholastic in this sense. It involved using the
long forgotten texts to try to generate new ideas. Thus Abelard, who dominated
the intellectual life of the University of Paris in the early 12th century, insisted,
‘The man of understanding is he who has the ability to grasp and ponder the
hidden causes of things. By hidden causes we mean those from which things
originate, and these are to be investigated more by reason than by sensory
experience’.103 He was attacked by the mystic St Bernard of Calirvaux for
holding ‘himself able by human reason alone to comprehend God
altogether’.104
Reliance on reason did not mean that the new scholarship had to be remote
from practical activity. It was the scholar Roger Bacon who wrote down the
formula for gunpowder for the first time in the west, and explored ways of
using mirrors and lenses for magnification. It was another scholar, Peter of
Maricourt, who investigated magnetic properties and devised machines based
on them.105
With the scholarly translations came information on the techniques
discovered more than 1,000 years previously in Greece, Rome or Alexandria,
and on the techniques which the Islamic societies of the eastern Mediterranean
and central Asia had acquired from China. These added to the improvements
which local millwrights, blacksmiths and builders were already making to
tools and equipment and resulted in ‘a passion for mechanisation of industry
such as no culture had known’.106
Water mills began to provide the motion for bellows for blacksmiths’
hammers, and for ‘fulling’ (beating cloth to finish it). The crank and the
compound crank turned up-down motion into rotary motion (and visa versa),
and the flywheel kept rotation at an even speed. The spinning wheel and the
compass arrived from the Far East in the 12th century, and the rudder replaced
the steering oar in the 13th, enormously increasing the reliability of sea
transport. The discovery of the eyeglass meant declining eyesight no longer
ended the careers of clerks and scholars. The horse stirrup, advances in
armour-making, the crossbow, the stonethrower, and then gunpowder and the
cannon (first used in 1320), transformed warfare. And the humble
wheelbarrow, almost unnoticed, altered the character of much backbreaking
work on the land.
Such technical advance underlay the full flourishing of medieval society
and culture in the late 13th and early 14th centuries. By this time ‘communes’,
self governing city states, dominated the political landscape of northern Italy
and Flanders.107 Writers such as Bocaccio, Chaucer and, above all, Dante
made a name for themselves by producing a secular literature written in their
local idiom—and, in the process, gave it the prestige to begin its transition into
a ‘national’ language. And towering above the medieval towns were those
monuments to its culture, the great cathedrals. These were works of
construction and art inconceivable without the agricultural, technical and
ideological changes of the previous centuries.
The crisis of the 14th century
The period of economic growth and technical advance was not to last. For it
occurred in a society dominated by a class of feudal lords whose way of life
still centred around luxury consumption, preparation for war and notions of
military honour, and over time this became a drain on, rather than a spur to,
advance. Typically, medieval legend celebrated as ‘good kings’ those like
Richard the Lionheart or ‘Saint’ Louis IX of France who spent vast sums on
leading rampaging bands of brigands across Europe and Asia Minor to try and
displace the Muslims from Palestine in the ‘Crusades’. Just as wasteful, and
ruinous to the lands they passed through, were the wars waged by Norman
kings as they attempted to subdue Scotland, Wales and much of France and
Ireland as well as England, or the wars waged in 13th century Italy between
German ‘Holy Roman’ emperors and French kings allied with the pope.108 At
most, 1 or 2 percent of revenues went into new investment.109
The lords grew ever more remote from the practicalities of producing the
wealth they consumed. The descendants of the warriors in rough fortresses
resided in elaborate castles, cloaked themselves in silk and engaged in
expensive courtly and knightly rituals which asserted their superiority over
other social groups. They regarded themselves as a caste apart from everybody
else, with hereditary legal rights sanctioned by sacred religious ceremonies.
Within this caste an elaborate gradation of ranks separated the great aristocrats
from the ordinary knights who were legally dependent on them. But all its
layers were increasingly disdainful of anyone involved in actually creating
wealth—whether wealthy merchants, humble artisans or impoverished
peasants.
The popes, abbots and bishops were part of this ruling class and shared its
attitudes, but had distinct interests of their own. In the late 11th century a series
of ‘reforming’ popes had aspired to centralise the network of abbeys and
bishoprics so as to impose a near-theocratic structure on the whole of Europe.
One product of this was that the church attempted to establish peace between
rival lords and make itself the dominant influence in society. Another was the
utter waste and devastation of the Crusades. The popes used the call to ‘free’
Jerusalem from the ‘infidel’ Muslims (who had never stopped Christian
pilgrimages), and the prospect of loot, to persuade kings, lords and knights to
join massive armies under papal jurisdiction. It did not worry them that the
exploits of these armies included the wanton sacking of cities, the slaughter of
women and children, rape, pillage, pogroms of Jews, Muslims and non-
Catholic Christians, and the conquest and pillage of Constantinople in 1204.110
The wars between the popes (allied with the French king) and the emperors
which devastated Italy in the 13th century were another product of papal
ambition.
The popes, bishops and abbots also devoted themselves to upholding the
wider values they shared in common with the lords. The cathedrals, the
greatest artistic creations of the period, were also the greatest symbol of the
power of the ruling class, emphasising the God-ordained character of society,
with heavenly hierarchies of angels, saints and humans corresponding to
earthly hierarchies of kings, lords, abbots, bishops, knights and commoners.
The hold of the church over the minds of the masses depended on the
superstitions and magical beliefs in holy relics and miracles which flourished
in a society where life was often short and almost always insecure. This led
the church leaders to fear the new ideas spreading in the cities. The faith in
reason of people like Abelard and Bacon could undermine the hold of
superstition, while the wandering monks who preached a gospel of poverty and
humility could encourage the ‘heretical’ belief that the ‘holy poor’ were
entitled to wage war on the ‘corrupt rich’. The church increasingly clamped
down on new ideas. It gave official recognition to moderate Franciscans but
persecuted the ‘extremist’ fratelli. Then in 1277 it tried to ban 219 ‘execrable
errors’ (some of which were held by the great apologist for late medieval
Christianity, Thomas Aquinas) from the teaching of scholars. Roger Bacon
seems to have been held under house arrest, and the followers of Averroës
were forced to leave Paris for Padua. Finally, in the course of the 14th century,
the Inquisition came into existence and, with it, the burning of people for
heresy. In the new atmosphere scholars began to keep clear of ‘dangerous
discussions’. After Thomas Aquinas recast Christian theology on the basis of
Aristotle’s ideas—in the process justifying the hierarchy of aristocrats, knights,
merchants, artisans and peasants—medieval thought entered its truly
scholastic, sterile phase in which there was no questioning of the basics of
church dogma or of the notions of the physical world that went with it.
By the year 1300 there was a vast contradiction at the heart of European
society. Material and cultural life had reached a peak which bore comparison
with that of the high point of Roman civilisation. It looked as if society was
going forward, escaping, albeit slowly, from poverty, insecurity and
superstition. Yet the top of society was increasingly freezing up, as the lords
made the barriers separating them from other classes ever more rigid, as the
church clamped down on dissent and rational thought, and as ever greater
amounts of the surplus were used for luxuries, warfare and ritual.
The contradiction came to a head as famines spread across much of Europe
and plague came in their wake, its virulence increased by the widespread
malnutrition. Half the population was wiped out, vast numbers of villages
were abandoned, and millions of hectares of cultivated land went to waste in
the great crisis of the 14th century. As Guy Bois tells, ‘For more than a
century…the greater part of the continent…suffered a massive decline in
population and a regression in productive capacity. In scope and duration the
phenomenon had no known historical precedent. It took place in an atmosphere
of catastrophe: ceaseless epidemics, endemic war and its train of destruction,
spiritual disarray, social and political disturbances’.111
As with the crises which plunged previous civilisations into ‘Dark Ages’,
there have been attempts to explain what happened in terms of natural causes.
Some historians blame a supposed cooling of Europe’s climate. But this does
not explain why people could not adjust over the decades, turning to new and
more hardy crops—for instance, planting barley where they had once grown
wheat, and wheat where they had once grown vines. Others claim population
growth used up all the land open to cultivation. But it seems unlikely that all
waste land had, in fact, been used and, in any case, it does not explain why
crop yields stopped rising as they had in previous centuries.
The real cause of the crisis lay in the increasing burden on society of
sustaining the lifestyle of the feudal ruling class. On the one hand, as Georges
Duby notes, ‘In the most advanced countries…the grain-centred system of
husbandry began to be unsettled by the requirement of the gradual rise in
aristocratic and urban living standards’ and increasing demand for luxury
products.112 On the other, there was little new investment on technical
improvement. As Rodney Hilton reports, ‘The social structure and the habits of
the landed nobility did not permit accumulation for investment for
production’.113
Class struggles and millenarial movements
The sheer scale of the crisis led to convulsions right across society. Even the
ruling class faced difficulties. There was a ‘crisis of seigneurial incomes’114
brought on first by the problems of extracting the surplus from a starving
peasantry, and then by the acute shortage of agricultural labour caused by the
death toll from famine and plague. The lords turned even more readily than in
the past to wars against each other—as in the seemingly endless ‘Hundred
Years War’ between English and French monarchs. They also tried to replenish
their revenues by taking more from the classes below them, the peasants and
the burghers. Economic crisis bred bitter class struggles.
Battles between lords and peasants were not something new. Resistance to
enserfment had led, for instance, to a great rising in 10th century northern
France. As a later poem tells:
The villeins and the peasants…
Held several parliaments.
They spread out this command:
He who is higher, he is the enemy…
And several of them made an oath
That they would never agree
To have lord or master.115
Once feudalism was fully established peasants found it more difficult to
challenge a lord directly. He was armed in a way they were not, they relied on
him to provide certain tools and to feed them in years when the crop failed,
and his power was backed by the teachings of the church. But they could still
put up resistance if his demands exceeded the customary level. They gained
some strength from far outnumbering the lord and his retainers on each
individual estate and from the ties that came from generations of living and
intermarrying in the same villages.
In many areas the bitterness flared up as never before. In 1325 the free
peasants of western Flanders took up arms, refusing to pay tithes to the church
or dues to the feudal lords. They were not defeated until the King of France
intervened in 1328. In 1358 a great jacquerie—rural uprising—in the Seine
valley of northern France led to attacks on nobles and the burning of chateaux.
In June 1381 the English ‘Peasants’ Revolt’ briefly gave control of London to
rural insurgents led by Wat Tyler (who were hanged after they made the
mistake of trusting the king). The rebellion saw the whole peasantry begin to
unite to demand its freedom from the feudal lords: ‘The abolition of bondage
and serfdom was the first of the articles of the peasant programme’.116 John
Ball, the popular ex-priest who helped inspire the revolt, preached an
unashamed attack on noble privilege: ‘When Adam delved and Eve span, who
was then the gentleman?’
Sections of the urban population gave their support to the Flanders
peasants in 1320 and to the English revolt of 1381. It was townsfolk who
opened the gates of London to the peasants, and the London poor joined the
insurgent throng. But the 14th century also saw widespread urban revolts
against the old order.
Some represented a continuation of previous struggles by the citizens of
towns to establish their independence from local lords. There were repeated
struggles of this kind in Flanders. In Paris in the late 1350s some of the richer
burghers took advantage of the opportunity offered by the king’s imprisonment
by the English to seize control of the city. Etienne Marcel, a member of a
wealthy merchant family, led 3,000 artisans into the royal palace and forced
the king’s heir, the Dauphin, briefly to wear the colours of revolt. In Florence
in northern Italy revolt went a stage further in 1378 when the mass of ordinary
artisans in the woollen trades, the ciompi, turned against the heads of its ruling
merchant guilds and took effective control of the city for two months.117
Such direct displays of class militancy were not the only way people
responded to the devastation of their lives. There was a long history of
millenarial movements in medieval Europe, which combined popular
bitterness against the rich with the religious expectation of the Second Coming
of Christ and, often, hatred of outsiders. The official Crusades of the popes
prompted unofficial Crusades of the masses—the ‘People’s’, ‘Children’s’ and
‘Shepherds” Crusades. Heretic preachers gained enormous support by
proclaiming themselves the successors to Jesus. Typically, masses of people
would march from town to town, looting and gathering popular support. They
would direct their bitterness not against the feudal ruling class as such, but
against corrupt priests and, especially, Jews. These were an easy target. They
were the only non-Christian group in a society where Christianity was the all-
pervasive religion; excluded from agriculture by the attitude of the church, they
were forced to play a role as merchants and moneylenders on the margins of
medieval society; and they lacked the power of the really wealthy classes to
defend themselves. Jews would be given a choice between immediate
conversion to Christianity and instant death. But the crowds would also drag
priests through the streets and loot their churches.
The crisis sparked off a succession of such confused quasi-religious
movements. In 1309 in Flanders and northern France:
Armed columns appeared, consisting of miserably poor artisans and labourers
with an admixture of nobles who had squandered their wealth. These people
begged and pillaged their way through the country, killing Jews but also
storming…castles…In the end they attacked the castle of the Duke of
Brabant…who three years before had routed an army of insurgent clothworkers
and, it is said, buried its leaders alive.118
In 1520 columns of the poor and dispossessed were again on the move, led
by an unfrocked priest, a heretic monk and prophets who proclaimed that much
bloodshed would herald the dawning of a new age. They stormed the prison in
Paris and broke into the Chatelet Palace before going on to Toulouse and
Bordeaux. As they marched, they killed Jews.119 But they also denounced
priests as ‘false shepherds who rob their herds, and began to talk about
expropriating the property of the monasteries’. The pope, resident in Avignon,
sent an armed force against them, hanging the participants 20 or 30 at a time.120
The panic during the Black Death of the late 1340s led to a further
outbreak of religious hysteria—the flagellants. Encouraged by a papal
statement, bands of men up to 500 strong, dressed in identical robes and
singing hymns, would march to a town, where they would form a circle and set
about beating their own backs rhythmically with iron spikes embedded in
leather belts until they were covered with bleeding wounds. They believed that
by imitating the pain Christ had endured on the cross they were purging
themselves of the sins which had brought the world to its present state and
ensuring their own passage to paradise. Their religious ecstasy was combined
with what today would be called a ‘moral panic’—their belief that some
conspiracy must lie behind the sudden appearance of the Black Death. They
massacred the Jews, who were accused of spreading the plague by poisoning
wells—although, of course, Jews were as badly hit by the plague as
Christians. But they also attacked priests and talked of seizing the wealth of the
church, prompting the pope to denounce them in a ‘bull’, and various secular
authorities to hang and behead those who did not obey it.121
The beginning of the 15th century saw a different sort of religious
movement arise in Bohemia,122 which contained some of the characteristics of
the earlier urban revolts in Flanders, France and Italy, but which was also a
rehearsal for the great Protestant Reformation 100 years later. The region had
undergone rapid economic development. It contained the richest silver mine in
Europe and the most important seat of learning in the (German) Holy Roman
Empire. But much of the wealth was in the hands of the church, which owned
fully one half of the land. This caused enormous resentment, not just among the
poorer classes of town and country but even among many of the knights who
spoke Czech rather than German.
The resentment found expression in massive support for the views of Jan
Hus, a preacher and professor at the university who agitated forcefully against
the corruption of the church and the claim of the pope to be the sole interpreter
of God’s wishes. Hus even had some backing from the Bohemian king,
Wenceslas. When the emperor, at the behest of the pope, burnt Hus at the stake
in 1415, virtually the entire Czech population of Bohemia rose in revolt, taking
control of the church and its property into local hands.
The king turned against the movement, and the nobles and the rich
merchants became increasingly worried by the peasants’ tendency to reject
exploitation by anyone, not just the church. Artisans belonging to the radical
‘Taborite’ wing of the movement controlled Prague for four months before
being removed by the merchants who hoped to conciliate the pope and the
emperor. There was a decade of war as the emperor and pope fought to crush
the Bohemian revolt. Repeated vacillations by the Czech nobility and the
Prague burghers pushed the rank and file of the Taborites to look to radical
ideas, with egalitarian slogans like, ‘All shall live together as brothers; none
shall be subject to another’, ‘The Lord shall reign and the Kingdom shall be
handed over to people of the earth’, and, ‘All lords, nobles and knights shall
be cut down and exterminated in the forests like outlaws’.123 It was not until
May 1434 that a noble army of 25,000 defeated the Taborite force—aided by
the desertion of one of its generals. No fewer than 13,000 of the Taborites
were killed.
Flanders, northern Italy, northern France, Britain, Bohemia—the crisis of
feudalism led to a series of great rebellions. Yet the power of the feudal lords
remained intact. No class emerged capable of uniting the rest of society behind
it in an onslaught on the system.
For centuries the burghers of the towns had resisted the power of the lords.
But the ruling councils of the towns tended to be oligarchies, dominated by
great merchants who were rarely more than half-opposed to the feudal lords.
Living within the feudal system, they tended to accept much of its ideology.
Their ambition much of the time was not to beat the feudal lords but to join
them—to turn the wealth they had obtained from trade into the seemingly more
permanent wealth that consisted in owning land, complete with serfs to till it.
At every great turning point, they would at best vacillate and try to conciliate
the lords, and at worst they would join them in attacking the masses. What
happened in northern Italy was characteristic. This was probably the most
economically advanced part of Europe at the beginning of the 14th century and
the region least damaged by the crisis. A merchant family, the Medicis, came to
dominate its most important city, Florence, with its vast cloth trade. But they
used their power in the 15th century not to break feudalism apart, but to
establish themselves as key players in the manoeuvres of lordly and princely
families, and in doing so ensured the continual fragmentation of the area into
warring statelets and eventual economic decay.124
The artisans of the towns could be more radical. Many were only a
generation or two away from serfdom themselves, and, like the surrounding
peasantry, they faced starvation when the harvest failed. There are repeated
examples of them clashing with the town oligarchies, and, on occasion,
throwing in their lot with rural uprisings. Yet they were not a homogeneous
group. Some were relatively prosperous, running their own workshops using
family labour and perhaps a couple of paid employees (‘journeymen’) and
apprentices. Others were much poorer, and terrified of being forced down into
the destitute masses from the countryside who scrabbled for whatever casual
work was available. That is why as well as the artisan movements which
allied the towns with revolts in the countryside, there were others which
joined the rich merchants. It is also why there was support from sections of the
urban masses for the religious frenzy of the ‘People’s Crusades’ and the
flagellants.
Finally, there were the peasants. Peasant risings could shake society, but
the peasants themselves—illiterate, scattered across the countryside, each
concerned with their own village and their own land—could not conceive of
any realistic programme for reconstituting society. Such a programme would
have had to combine a revolutionary attack on the power of the lords with
schemes for using technical development in the towns to enhance agricultural
output in the countryside. Economic development had not yet gone far enough
to fashion a class, in the city or the countryside, capable of presenting such a
programme in however confused a manner.
There already existed the embryos which would one day grow to create
such a class. In some towns there were merchants and craftsmen interested in
technical innovation and productive investment. In some regions of the
countryside there were better off peasants with notions of becoming more
prosperous by throwing off the burden of lordly exploitation and tilling the
land more productively. But a promising embryo was not the same as a class
capable of bringing to an end a crisis which was causing devastation to society
at large.
The birth of market feudalism
The crisis of European feudalism was, however, different in one very
important respect from the crisis that had hit ancient Rome, Sung China or the
Arab empires of the Middle East. Recovery occurred much more quickly.
There was economic recovery and a renewal of population growth by the
middle of the 15th century.125 There was also a rise in living standards among
the survivors of the famine and plagues, since although the smaller population
could only till a smaller area of land, it tended to be the most fertile land. Food
output fell by much less than the number of people to be fed. What is more, the
importance of some towns actually increased. Part of the rural population,
especially the lords, had become too dependent on the goods produced in the
towns for society to revert to a system of production on virtually self contained
estates. As their demand for goods grew, so did their desire for cash, which
they could only get by selling a growing proportion of rural output. Market
networks continued to penetrate the countryside, linking each village and
household to the traders of the towns.
The growth of market networks slowly but surely changed feudal society.
A few of the merchants became rich from the international trade in luxuries
which brought products from India, south east Asia and China to Europe.126
Their wealth could be sufficient for them to act as bankers to kings and
emperors, financing wars and reaping political as well as economic rewards.
Even those who could not aspire to such heights could dominate the political
life of their own towns, making them vital allies for kings trying to expand their
power.
The kings, in turn, began to see their futures not simply in fighting each
other or marrying into each other’s families for land, but also in terms of
gaining some of the profits from trade. Portuguese monarchs encouraged
merchants to use ships built with the most modern techniques to find a way
round Africa to the riches of Asia, and the ‘Catholic monarchs’ of Spain
financed Columbus’s voyage west across the Atlantic.
The mass of lesser traders were still little more than shopkeepers. But with
luck they could expand their influence and wealth by finding niches in feudal
society and slowly widening them. The butcher might be a humble fellow, but
he was in a position to provide cash inducements to local peasants to
specialise in certain sorts of livestock—that is, to begin to exercise a degree of
control over the farming economy. By the 15th century ‘every town had its
butchers, all of them prosperous, the new men of the pastoral economy and its
masters’.127
The urban traders often influenced life in the countryside in another way,
by encouraging less prosperous peasants to take up industrial crafts in the
countryside, away from the controls of the urban guilds. There was the growth
of a ‘putting-out’ system. The merchant would provide the raw materials to
rural workers, who would transform them into finished products in their own
homes, with little choice but to accept the price the merchant gave them.
How important such a change could be is shown by the case of the textile
industry. In the mid-14th century 96 percent of England’s most important
export, wool, was turned into cloth abroad, mainly in the towns of Flanders. A
century later 50 percent was exported already woven. The merchants had
increased their profits by weakening the hold of the Flemish artisans. But they
had also done something more. They had taken hold of some of the rural labour
which had previously been subject to the feudal lord. The long term effect was
to replace one form of exploitation by another. The direct robbery of the
products of peasant labour was replaced by a system in which individual
workers voluntarily accepted less than the full value of their products in return
for being supplied with raw materials or tools.
This was not fully capitalist production as we know it. Production in large
workplaces directly under the control of an entrepreneur was confined to a
very few industries, mainly mining. The putting-out system relied on people
who could still regard themselves as their own bosses. But it was a step
towards fully developed capitalism. The merchant had moved from simply
buying and selling goods to worrying about their production, and the direct
producers could no longer obtain a livelihood unless a portion of their output
went to the merchant as profit.
What is more, both the merchant and the producer were increasingly
subject to the dictates of markets over which they had no control. Dispersed
rural producers lacked the power of the town guilds to limit output and control
prices. They had no choice but to keep abreast of new cost-cutting techniques
introduced by other producers. The feudal organisation of production was
giving way to a quite different organisation, in which competition led to
investment and investment intensified competition. For the moment, this only
occurred in a few gaps within the old system. But it was like an acid, eating
into and changing the world around it.
The changes also influenced the ways some of the lords behaved. They
were desperate to increase their own supplies of cash, and there were two
ways of doing so. One was to use their old feudal powers and deploy
organised violence to strengthen serfdom, making the peasants provide
additional forced labour on large estates. The serfs would provide their own
subsistence at no cost to the lord, enabling him to sell the surplus at a
handsome price to merchants.
The other approach was for the lords to lease chunks of their property for
fixed rents and for long periods of time to the most efficient and go-ahead
section of the peasantry, who would then get other peasants with little or no
land to work for them. In effect, this involved the lord accepting the full
implications of the developing market system and opting to get his income as
rent from lands farmed in a capitalist manner.
Those regions most tightly covered with networks of towns made some
sort of move towards capitalist agriculture, while elsewhere the shift was to
enhanced serfdom. Over a 300 year period England, the Netherlands, parts of
France and western Germany, and Bohemia moved in one direction, while
eastern Europe and southern Italy moved in the other. But neither
transformation took place instantaneously and without complications. Different
lords moved at different speeds, and the whole process became intertwined
with other changes. Some kings sought to extend their powers with the aid of
the urban rich and encountered resistance from the great lords. Kings fought
dynastic conflicts with each other. New ways of looking at the world
encouraged by urbanisation clashed with old ways associated with the feudal
order and embodied in the teachings of the church. Peasants rose up against
lords—class struggles between rich and poor erupted in the cities.
The issue was not resolved anywhere until after more than a century of
wars, revolutions and ideological turmoil—and until after another great period
of economic crisis leading to famine and plague.
Part four
The great transformation
Chronology
15th century
Ottomans conquer Constantinople 1453.
High point of Italian Renaissance—Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo,
Macchiavelli 1450-1520.
Strengthening of monarchies in France, Spain, Britain 1490s.
Spanish monarchs conquer Granada 1493.
Columbus lands in Caribbean 1492.
16th century
Portuguese sieze Goa 1510.
Ottomans conquer Cairo 1517, Algiers 1529, besiege Vienna 1529.
Influence of Renaissance spreads through western Europe. Erasmus in
Holland, Dürer in Germany, Rabelais in France.
Lutheran Reformation sweeps southern Germany 1518-25.
Cortés conquers Aztecs 1519-21.
German Peasant War 1525.
Mogul conquest of northern India 1529.
Pizarro conquers Inca Empire 1532.
Reformation from above and closing of monasteries in England 1534-39.
First agricultural enclosures in England.
Copernicus publishes a theory of the universe after 30 year delay 1540.
Ivan the Terrible centralises power in Russia, begins conquest of Siberia
(1544-84).
French wars of religion 1550s, 1560s.
Council of Trent inaugurates counter-Reformation 1560s.
Wave of witch-burning 1560-1630.
Pieter Breughel’s paintings of life in Flanders 1540s to 1560s.
The first revolts of Low Countries against Spanish rule 1560s, 1570s.
Shakespeare writes first plays 1590s.
17th century
Giordano Bruno burnt at stake by Inquisition 1600.
Kepler in Prague calculates orbits of planets accurately 1609.
Galileo uses telescope to observe moon 1609.
Thirty Years War begins in Bohemia 1618.
First English colonies established in North America 1620s and 1630s.
Spread of American crops (potatoes, maize, sweet potatoes, tobacco) across
Eurasia and Africa.
Harvey describes circulation of blood 1628.
Galileo refutes Aristotelian physics 1632, condemned by Inquisition 1637.
Descartes’ Discourse on Method begins ‘rationalist’ school of philosophy
1637.
Holland takes over much of former Portuguese Empire 1630s.
Rembrandt paints in Amsterdam 1630s to 1660s.
English Civil War begins 1641-42. Reign of Shah Jahan in India, building of
Taj Mahal begins 1643.
Collapse of Ming Dynasty in China, Manchu conquest 1644.
Indian cotton goods exported in ever greater quantities to Europe.
End of Thirty Years War 1648.
English king beheaded 1649.
‘Second serfdom’ dominant in eastern Europe.
Hobbes’ Leviathan—materialist defence of conservative politics 1651.
Beginning of plantation slavery in Americas, 20,000 black slaves in Barbados
1653.
Growing market for Chinese silks and porcelain in Europe and Latin America.
England wins wars against Holland, takes Jamaica 1655.
Aurungzeb seizes Mogul throne in India 1658, war with Marathas 1662. Boyle
discovers law of gases, defends theory of atoms 1662.
Newton completes revolution in physics 1687.
‘Glorious Revolution’ of 1688 confirms domination of England by market-
oriented gentry.
Locke inaugurates ‘empiricist’ school of philosophy 1690.
Whites and blacks unite in Bacon’s rebellion in Virginia in 1687, legislature
bans black-white marriages 1691.
Chapter 1
The conquest of the New Spain
When we saw so many cities and villages built on the water and other towns
on dry land and that straight level causeway…we were amazed and said it was
the enchantments they tell of in the land of Amadis, on account of the great
towers and pyramids and buildings arising from the water and all built of
masonry. And some of our soldiers even asked whether the things that we saw
were not a dream.1
The temple itself is higher than the cathedral of Seville…The main plaza in the
middle of the city, twice the size of the one in Salamanca, is surrounded by
columns. Day after day 60,000 people congregate there to buy and sell. Every
sort of merchandise is available from every part of the empire, foodstuffs and
dress and in addition objects made of gold, silver, copper…precious stones,
leather, bone, mussels, coral, cotton, feathers…2
It is so beautiful and has such fine buildings that it would be remarkable even
in Spain…In many of the houses of the Incas there were vast halls, 200 yards
long by 50 to 60 yards wide…The largest was capable of holding 4,000
people.3
The first Europeans to come across the civilisations of the Aztecs in Mexico
and the Incas in Peru in the 1520s and 1530s were astounded by the splendour
and wealth of the buildings they found. The Aztec city of Tenochtitlan was as
great as any in Europe. The Inca capital of Cuzco was on a smaller scale, but
was linked by roads the like of which were unknown anywhere in Europe.
They connected an empire 3,000 miles in length—greater than the whole of
Europe or even of Ming China.
The civilisations were based on advanced ways of providing their people
with livelihoods, using sophisticated systems of irrigation. They had
developed means of collecting goods and moving them hundreds or even
thousands of miles to their capitals. Advances in agriculture had been
accompanied by advances in arts and sciences—architecture, visual arts,
mathematics, the drawing up of calendars which correlated the movement of
the moon (the basis of the months) with the apparent motion of the sun (the
basis of the year).
Yet within the space of a few months, small military forces led by
Spaniards Hernan Cortés and Francisco Pizarro—who were little more than
ruffians and adventurers (Pizarro was illiterate)—had conquered both empires.
They were following in the footsteps of the earlier adventurer Christopher
Columbus (in Spanish, Cristobal Colon). This sea captain from Genoa had
persuaded the co-rulers of Spain, Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile,
to finance an expedition to find a way to the fabled civilisation of China
(Cathay) and the wealth of the ‘spice islands’ (the East Indies) by sailing
westwards across the Atlantic.
There is a widespread myth that Columbus’s arguments were based on
some new, scientific understanding that met resistance from those with
superstitious ‘flat earth’ beliefs. In fact, the view that the world was round was
quite widespread by the 15th century. Columbus himself mixed bad science,
quotations from classical Greek and Roman authors and religious mysticism.4
He came to believe he was God’s appointed instrument to rescue Christianity
before the Apocalypse.5 He underestimated the Earth’s circumference by about
25 percent by misunderstanding the (correct) calculations of the 10th century
Arab geographer Al-Farghani. He set off with three small ships on 3 August
1492, expecting to arrive at China or Japan in a number of weeks and
encounter subjects of the ‘Great Khan’ who had ruled China in Marco Polo’s
time (200 years before). Instead, he reached a small island in the Caribbean in
the second week of October, from where he sailed on to the islands that are
now Cuba and Haiti.
The islands were inhabited by people who had neither states nor private
property, and who were remarkably friendly to the mysterious newcomers.
‘They were a gentle, peaceful and very simple people,’ the Spanish wrote of
the inhabitants, who they called ‘Tainos’. ‘When the boat was sent ashore for
water, the Indians very gladly showed them where to find it and carried the
filled casks to the…boat’.6
But Columbus’s aim was not to befriend the local inhabitants. What
fascinated him was the gold of the pendants they wore in their noses. He
wanted to enrich himself and justify to the Spanish monarchs their expenditure
on his voyage. He repeatedly tried to learn from the inhabitants where gold
was to be found even though he did not understand a word of their language or
they a word of his!
He wrote later, ‘Gold is most excellent…whoever has it may do what he
wants in this world, and may succeed in taking souls to Paradise’.7
Columbus wrote to his royal sponsors that the inhabitants were ‘such an
affectionate and generous people and so tractable that there are no better
people or land in the world. They love their neighbours as themselves and
their speech is the sweetest and gentlest in the world, and they always speak
with a smile’.8 But his aim was to capture and enslave these people. His son
tells, ‘He ordered that some of the people of the island be made captives…So
the Christians seized 12 persons, men, women and children’.9 He planned to
build a fortress from which ‘with 50 men they [the inhabitants] could be
subjected and made to do all that one might wish’.10
Not all the inhabitants of the islands were silly enough to tolerate such
behaviour. Columbus was soon claiming that alongside the peaceful Tainos
there were warlike ‘Caribs’, who needed to be subdued because they were
‘cannibals’. There was not then and has never been since any evidence that
these people ate human flesh. Columbus himself never set foot on a single
island inhabited by Caribs, and the only ones he ever met were women and
children his crew had taken captive. But the talk of cannibalism justified the
Spanish using their guns to terrify the indigenous peoples and their iron swords
and crossbows to cut them down. Well into the 20th century, the myth of
general ‘cannibalism’ among ‘savage’ peoples remained a potent justification
for colonialism.11
Despite his crude methods, Columbus found very little gold. He was not
any more successful on the next voyage he made in 1493, with much greater
investment by the monarchs, a much larger fleet and 1,500 would-be settlers
—‘artisans of all kinds, labourers and peasants to work the land, the
caballeros [knights], hidalgos [gentlemen] and other men of worth drawn by
the fame of gold and the wonders of the land’12—as well as many soldiers and
three priests. After establishing seven settlements, each with a fort and several
gallows, across the island of Hispaniola (Haiti), he decreed that every ‘Indian’
over the age of 14 had to supply a certain amount of gold every three months.
Those who did not were to be punished by having their hands cut off and left to
bleed to death.13 Yet despite this barbarity, they could not meet the demand for
gold, for the simple reason that no one had discovered more than very small
quantities on the island.
Columbus tried to supplement his hunt for wealth from gold with another
source—slavery. In February 1495 he rounded up 1,600 Tainos—the ‘gentle’,
‘peaceful’ and helpful people of two and a half years before—and sent 550 of
them in chains on a ship to Seville with the aim of selling them as slaves. Two
hundred died on the passage across the Atlantic. He followed this by
establishing an encomienda system, which enabled appointed colonists to use
the forced labour of Indians.
The impact of Columbus’s measures on the people he still insisted on
calling ‘Indians’ was disastrous. The population of Hispaniola was probably
well over a million, and possibly much higher, at the time of Columbus’s first
landing14—20 years later it was around 28,000, and by 1542 it was 200. The
settler-turned-priest Las Casas blamed the methods of the colonists, ‘the
greatest outrages and slaughterings of people’.15 More recently, another cause
has often been stated as more important—the diseases brought by the
Europeans to which the ‘Indians’ had no immunity. Measles, influenza, typhus,
pneumonia, tuberculosis, diphtheria and, above all, smallpox would have done
terrible damage to people who had never encountered them before. Yet it is
difficult to believe that disease alone accounts for the virtual obliteration of the
islands’ original inhabitants. In most parts of the mainland Americas at least
some of the ‘Indians’ survived. The scale of the deaths in the earliest Spanish
colonies must owe something to the barbarity of the methods of Columbus and
his settlers.
Yet the barbarity in itself could not provide Columbus, the settlers and
their royal sponsors with the wealth they wanted. The first colonies were
fraught with problems. The gentlemen settlers found life much harder than they
expected. Their Indian workers died, leaving them without a labour force to
run the large estates they had marked out. Settlers from the lower classes soon
grew tired of the pressures to work from above. The tale of Columbus’s period
as governor of Hispaniola is one of repeated rebellions against his rule. He
responded with the same barbarity he showed to the indigenous peoples. At the
end of his third voyage he was sent home to Spain in chains—to jeers from
Hispaniola’s settlers—after his replacement as governor was horrified to find
seven Spaniards hanging from the gallows in the town square of Santo
Domingo.16 He was released after a spell of confinement in Spain. But his
fourth voyage was a miserable affair. He was banned by the crown from the
settlements of Hispaniola and ended up shipwrecked, before returning to Spain
disillusioned and virtually forgotten. The Spanish monarchy which had
sponsored him was still more interested in its battles against the French for
domination of Italy than in islands far away. Its attitude only changed when
other adventurers discovered massive wealth.17
The conquest of the Aztecs
In 1517 Moctezuma, the Aztec ruler of Mexico, received the first reports of
strange, pale men sailing off the shores of his realm in ‘a number of mountains
moving in the middle of the water’.18 The ships belonged to a reconnaissance
expedition. Two years later a force of 500 men from Spain’s Cuban settlement
landed, headed by the soldier Hernan Cortés who had heard rumours of a great
empire and was determined to conquer it. His men regarded this ambition as
mad beyond belief and Cortés had to burn his own ships to prevent them
retreating back to Cuba. Yet within two years he had conquered an army
hundreds of times larger than his own.
His success rested on a number of factors. Moctezuma did not destroy
Cortés’s forces on their beach-head while he had the chance, but provided
them with the facilities to move from the coast to the Valley of Mexico. There
was no limit to Cortés’s duplicity and, on reaching the Aztec capital of
Tenochtitlan, he pretended to befriend Moctezuma before taking him captive.
The smallpox germs the Spanish unknowingly carried swept through
Tenochtitlan, striking down a huge number of people at a decisive moment in
the Spanish siege of the city. Finally, the Spanish enjoyed superiority in arms.
This was not mainly a question of their guns, which were inaccurate and took a
long time to load. More significant was the steel of the Spaniards’ armour and
swords, which could slash right through the thick cloth which constituted the
armour of the Aztecs. In the final battle for Tenochtitlan, superior Spanish
naval technology enabled them to dominate the lakes around the city, driving
off the canoes the Aztecs relied on to maintain food supplies.
Some of the elements in the Spanish victory were accidental. If
Montezuma’s brother, Cuitlahuac, had been ruling in his place, Cortés would
never have been given a guided tour of the capital and a chance to kidnap the
emperor. Cortés’s troops were certainly not invincible. At one point Cortés
was forced to flee Tenochtitlan and lost most of his army. If the Spanish had
encountered more opposition, the divisions in their own ranks might have
proved decisive—since a new Spanish force had landed in Mexico with
orders to treat Cortés as a traitor.
However, underlying the accidental factors in Cortés’s victory was
something more fundamental. He was confronting an empire that, like the
Spanish Empire, was exploitative and oppressive, but with a less advanced
technology at its disposal.
The Aztecs had originally been a hunting-gathering people with some
limited knowledge of agriculture, who had arrived in the Valley of Mexico in
the mid-13th century. The area was already settled by several city states, heirs
to the remnants of the Teotihuacan and Mayan civilisations (described in part
two), which subjugated the Aztecs and left them only the most infertile land to
till. The Aztecs did not remain subjugated for long, however. They made a
technological breakthrough which enabled them to increase their crop output
enormously—cultivation on artificial islands (chinampas) on the lakes—and
the turn to intensive agriculture was accompanied by the rise of an aristocratic
class which enforced labour on the rest of society. The aristocracy was not
content with just exploiting the Aztec lower classes. Soon it was fighting the
other city states for hegemony over the Valley of Mexico, and then it embarked
on the creation of an empire which stretched hundreds of miles south to what is
now Guatemala. The rise of the new militaristic ruling class was accompanied
by the growth of a militaristic ideology. It centred on the worship of the old
tribal god of the Aztecs, Huitzilopochtli, the hummingbird, who gave eternal
life to those who died violently, but required continual infusions of human
blood to sustain him on his daily journey. A central ceremony of this religion
was the human sacrifice of prisoners of war—and subject peoples, as well as
paying material tribute to the Aztecs, had to hand over a number of women and
children for sacrifice. This religion provided the Aztec warrior class with the
determination to fight to construct an empire. It also helped reconcile the often
hungry Aztec lower classes to their lot, in much the same way that the Roman
circuses and ‘triumphs’ (when captured princes were strangled) had done. But
as the empire grew, it created tensions in Aztec society as some ruling class
individuals raised the sacrifices to unprecedentedly high levels, until on one
occasion 80,000 victims were said to have been slaughtered on the platform of
Tenochtitlan’s temple in 96 hours.19 It also heightened the sense of oppression
among those who had been conquered, even as it created a climate of terror
which made them afraid to rebel. They were attracted to cults of a more pacific
character. Even among the Aztec aristocracy there was a belief that one day the
peaceful feathered serpent god Quetzalcoatl would return.
The Spanish conquerors arrived just as these tensions were at their
sharpest. A great famine had hit the Aztec lower classes in 1505, forcing many
to sell themselves into slavery. The level of loot from conquest was in decline,
and Moctezuma had increased his own power within the ruling class using the
blood sacrifice cult. Yet the challenge to the cult was great enough for him to
fear Cortés was the returning Quetzalcoatl and to welcome him accordingly.
More important, perhaps, the peoples who had been subjugated by the Aztecs
rushed to back the invaders. There were more indigenous troops fighting on the
Spanish side than on the Aztec side in the final battle for Tenochtitlan.
Both the Aztec and the Spanish empires were based on tribute, backed by
vicious retribution against those who tried to rebel. Both held to the most
inhuman of religions, with the Spanish being as prepared to burn heretics at the
stake as the Aztecs were to sacrifice people to appease the gods. After the
conquest the Spanish established a permanent auto da fé (place for burning
heretics) on the site of the Tenochtitlan marketplace.20 But Spain had the use of
the iron-based technologies which had developed across Eurasia and north
Africa in the previous two millennia, while the Aztecs were dependent on
stone and wood-based technologies, even if they had advanced these further
than people anywhere else in the world. Of the metals, they had only gold and
copper—and copper was rare and used only for decoration. Their weapons
were made of obsidian, a stone that can be given a razor sharp edge but which
breaks easily.
The lack of metal led to other lags in Aztec technology. For instance, the
Aztecs had no wheeled vehicles. Gordon Childe suggested this was because
wheels need to be shaped by a saw, something not easy to make without a
metal harder than copper.21
Why had the Aztecs not learned metallurgy? Jared Diamond points to
certain geographical disadvantages similar to those in Africa. The peoples of
Mexico could not draw on innovations made thousands of miles away. Mexico
was separated by the tropical belt of Central America from the other great
Latin American civilisation in the Andes—which had moved further towards
metallurgy, but was still not acquainted with iron.22 But the Mexicans also did
not have any great incentive to adopt metallurgy. They had managed to develop
sophisticated methods of food production and build impressive cities without
it. If they faced periodic famines, so did the iron based civilisations of Europe
and Asia. It was only when they were suddenly faced with the iron armaments
of the Europeans that their lack of metallurgy became a fatal disadvantage,
causing them to be overthrown by people who in other respects were not more
‘advanced’.
The subjection of Peru
History rarely repeats itself closely. But it did when a relative of Cortés,
Francisco Pizarro, sailed south from Panama down the Pacific coast of South
America in the early 1530s, a decade after the conquest of Mexico.
He had made two previous surveillance trips and knew that somewhere
inland was a great empire. This time he landed at the coastal town of Tumbez
with 106 foot soldiers and 62 horsemen. There he received news of a civil
war in the great Inca Empire as two half brothers, Atahualpa in the north and
Huascar in the south, quarrelled over the inheritance of their father, the Great
Inca Huana-Cupac. Pizarro was quick to make contact with representatives of
Atahualpa, assuring him of his friendship, and received an invitation to meet
him at the town of Cajamarca in the Andes. The journey inland and up into the
mountains would have been virtually impossible for the Spanish contingent
without Inca guides to direct them along a road which had well provisioned
rest places at the end of each day’s march.
At Cajamarca the Spaniards stationed themselves within the walls of the
town, most hiding with their guns and horses. Atahualpa left most of a huge
Inca army behind and entered the town in ceremonial fashion with 5,000 or
6,000 men, in no way prepared for fighting. Pizarro’s brother Hernando later
recounted:
He arrived in a litter, preceded by three or four hundred liveried Indians, who
swept the dirt off the road and sang. Then came Atahualpa, surrounded by his
leaders and chieftains, the most important of whom were carried on the
shoulders of underlings.23
A Dominican monk with the Spaniards began speaking to Atahualpa, trying
to persuade him to convert to the Christian religion and pay tribute to the
Spanish king—on the grounds that the pope had allocated this part of Latin
America to Spain. The Inca is said to have replied:
I will be no man’s tributary…As to the pope of which you speak, he must be
crazy to talk of giving away countries that do not belong to him. As for my
faith, I will not change it. Your own god, you say, was put to death by the very
men whom he created. But my god still lives in heaven and looks down on his
children.24
He threw to the ground a Bible that had been handed to him. The monk said
to Pizarro, ‘Do you not see that while we stand here wasting our breath or
talking with this dog, the field is filling with Indians. Set on them at once. I
absolve you’.25 Pizarro waved a white scarf, the hidden Spanish troops opened
fire and, as the noise and smoke created panic among the assembled Incas, the
cavalry charged at them. There was nowhere for the Incas to flee. According to
Spanish estimates, 2,000 Incas died, according to Inca estimates 10,000.26
Atahualpa was now a prisoner of the Spanish, forced to act as their front
man while they took over the core of his empire. He assumed he could buy
them off, given their strange obsession with gold, and collected a huge pile of
it. He was sorely mistaken. Pizarro took the gold and executed the Inca after a
mockery of a trial at which he was charged among other things with ‘adultery
and plurality of wives’, ‘idolatry’ and ‘exciting insurrection against the
Spanish’. He was taken to the city square to be burnt at the stake, where he
said he wanted to convert to Christianity—believing the Spanish would not
burn a baptised Christian. He was right. After his baptism, Pizarro ordered he
should be strangled instead.27
The massacre and the murder of Atahualpa set the pattern for the conquest
of the rest of the Inca Empire. As hundreds more Spanish soldiers joined him,
attracted by the lure of gold, Pizarro established one of Atahualpa’s brothers as
puppet emperor and set off on a march to the Inca capital, Cuzco, burning alive
another Inca leader, Calicuchima, who tried to oppose him. On taking the city,
the Spaniards stole gold from the houses and temples and seized Inca
princesses. The 56 year old Pizarro was proud to have a child by a 15 year
old, who he married off to a follower. The treatment of ordinary Incas was
later described by a priest, Cristobal do Molina, who accompanied a Spanish
column south into Chile:
Any native who would not accompany the Spaniards voluntarily was taken
along bound in ropes and chains. The Spaniards imprisoned them in very rough
prisons every night, and led them by day heavily loaded and dying of hunger.
One Spaniard on this expedition locked 12 Indians in a chain and boasted that
all 12 died of it.28
The Spanish conquerors aimed to enrich themselves and resorted to
slavery as well as the looting of gold. They divided the country into
encomiendo districts over which chosen colonists had the power to extract
forced labour, relying on the Laws of Burgos of 1512-13, which ruled that
Indian men were compelled to work for Spaniards for nine months of the year.
The decree was meant to be read out to the Indians, who were told their wives
and children would be enslaved and their possessions confiscated if they did
not obey.29 There was also tribute to be paid to the priests who, in some cases,
‘maintained private stocks, prisons, chains and ships to punish religious
offenders’.30
The Spanish did not have things all their own way. They faced a
succession of revolts. One of Pizarro’s brothers was besieged in Cuzco for
months. Inca resistance was not crushed until the execution of the last emperor,
Tupac Amura, in 1572. But the Incas were doomed for similar reasons to the
Aztecs in Mexico. They had copper, but not iron, and llamas rather than the
much stronger horses and mules. A Bronze Age civilisation, however refined,
could not withstand an Iron Age one, however crude. The horses were, as
Hemmings put it, ‘the tanks of the conquest’.31 It was only when Indians further
south in Chile acquired the use of horses that the advance of the conquerors
suffered serious setbacks.
A few members of the imperial family did manage to survive under the
new set up, integrating themselves into the Spanish upper class. As Hemmings
relates, ‘They were as eager for titles, for coats of arms, for fine Spanish
clothes and unearned income as any Spanish hidalgo’.32 But for the masses
who had lived in the Inca Empire, life became incomparably worse than
before. One Spaniard noble wrote to the king in 1535, ‘I moved across a good
portion of the country and saw terrible destruction’.33 Another contrasted the
situation under the Incas with that after the conquest: ‘The entire country was
calm and well nourished, whereas today we see only infinite deserted villages
on all the roads in the kingdom’.34
The harm done by the conquest was made worse by the obsession of each
of the new rulers with gaining as much wealth as possible. This led to bitter
civil wars between rival Spanish commanders and to risings of the newly rich
settlers against representatives of the Spanish crown. As rival armies burned
and pillaged, the irrigation canals and hillside terraces which had been
essential to agriculture went to waste, the llama herds were slaughtered, the
food stocks kept in case of harvest failure were eaten. The hungry were hit by
the same European diseases which had caused so much harm in the Caribbean.
The effect was even greater than that of the Black Death on 14th century
Europe. In the valley of Lima only 2,000 out of a population of 25,000
survived into the 1540s. The indigenous population of the empire fell by
between a half and three-quarters.
So devastated was the land that even the Spanish monarchy began to
worry. It wanted an empire that would provide wealth, not one denuded of its
labour force. Again and again in the mid-1500s it debated measures to limit the
destructiveness of the settlers and to control the exploitation of the Indians. It
was then that priests like Las Casas who denounced the settlers came to
prominence. Yet their efforts did not lead to much change in the former Inca
Empire, since by now forced labour was essential for the profits the crown
was getting from its silver and mercury mines at Potosi—a city whose
population of 150,000 made it one of the largest in the world. In 1570 a
commission headed by Archbishop Loyza agreed that since the mines were in
the public interest, forced labour had to be tolerated.35
Chapter 2
Renaissance to Reformation
Columbus did not ‘discover’ America. The ‘Indians’ had done that at least
14,000 years before when they crossed the Bering Straits from Siberia into
Alaska. He was not even the first European to arrive there—the Vikings had
established a brief presence on the north eastern coast of North America half a
millennium before him. But 1493 did mark a turning point in history. For the
first time the previously backward societies on the Atlantic coast of Eurasia
were showing a capacity to exercise a dominant influence on other parts of the
world. So although the Spanish were as barbaric in the Americas as the
Crusaders had been in the Middle East three or four centuries before, the
outcome was different. The Crusaders came, saw, conquered and destroyed—
and then were driven out, leaving little behind but abandoned fortresses. The
Spanish came, saw, conquered, destroyed—and stayed to create a new,
permanent domain.
While this was happening across the Atlantic, equally significant and
ultimately world-shaking changes were taking place in Europe itself—changes
in politics, intellectual life and ideology and, underlying these, changes in the
ways millions of people obtained a living.
Much mainstream history is obsessed with how one monarch took over
from another. It consists of little more than lists of kings, queens and ministers,
with accompanying stories of manoeuvres by courtiers, princely murders and
dynastic battles. The political changes beginning at the end of the 15th century
stand apart from such trivia. They led to the rise of a new sort of state, which
in one version or another came to dominate the world.
People often use the words ‘country’ or ‘nation’ when speaking about the
ancient or medieval worlds. But the states which ruled then were very different
to the modern ‘national’ state.
Today we take it for granted that a country consists of geographically
continuous territory within fixed boundaries. We expect it to have a single
administrative structure, with a single set of taxes (sometimes with local
variations) and without customs barriers between its different areas. We
assume it demands the loyalty of its ‘citizens’, in return granting certain rights,
however limited. Being ‘stateless’ is a fate which people do their utmost to
avoid. We also assume there exists a national language (or sometimes a set of
languages) which both rulers and ruled speak.
The monarchies of medieval Europe had few of these features. They were
hodgepodge territories which cut across linguistic divisions between peoples
and across geographical obstacles. The emperor of the ‘Holy Roman Empire
of the German Nation’ usually ran Bohemia as a kingdom and claimed
sovereignty over various territories in the German speaking lands and in parts
of Italy. The kings of England engaged in a series of wars to try to assert a
claim over a large chunk of French-speaking territory. The kings of France
sought to hold territory across the Alps in what is today Italy but had little
control over eastern France (part of the rival Dukedom of Burgundy), south
west France and Normandy (ruled by the English kings), or Brittany. There
could be wholesale movement of state boundaries, as marriages and
inheritance gave kings sovereignty over distant lands or war robbed them of
local territories. There was rarely a single, uniform administrative structure
within a state. Usually it would be made up of principalities, duchies, baronies
and independent boroughs, with their own rulers, their own courts, their own
local laws, their own tax structure, their own customs posts and their own
armed men—so that the allegiance each owned to the monarch was often only
nominal and could be forgotten if a rival monarch made a better offer.
Monarchs often did not speak the languages of the people they ruled, and
official documents and legal statutes were rarely in the tongue of those subject
to their laws.
This began to change in important parts of Europe towards the end of the
15th century, just as Spain was reaching out to conquer Latin America. Charles
VII and Louis XI in France, Henry VII and Henry VIII in England, and the joint
monarchs Isabel and Ferdinand in Spain all succeeded in enhancing their own
power at the expense of the great feudal lords and in imposing some sort of
state-wide order within what are today’s national boundaries.
The changes were important because they constituted the first moves from
the feudal towards the modern setup. That transition was still far from
complete. The most powerful of the ‘new’ monarchies, that of Spain, still had
separate administrative structures for its Catalan, Valencian, Aragonese and
Castilian components, while its monarchs waged wars for another century and
a half to try to keep possession of lands in Italy and the Low Countries. The
French kings had to endure a series of wars and civil wars before they forced
the territorial lords to submit to ‘absolutist’ rule—and even then internal
customs posts and local legal systems remained in place. Even in England,
where the Norman Conquest in 1066 had created a more unified feudal state
than elsewhere, the northern earls retained considerable power and the
monarchs still had not abandoned their claims in ‘France’.
Nevertheless, the ‘new monarchies’ and the ‘absolutisms’ which later
developed out of them in France and Spain represented something different to
the old feudal order. They were states which rested on feudalism but in which
the monarchs had learned to use new forces connected with the market system
and the growth of the towns as a counterbalance to the power of the feudal
lords.36 Their policies were still partly directed toward the classic feudal
goals of acquiring land by means of force or marriage alliances. But another
goal was of increasing importance—building trade and locally based
production. So Isabel and Ferdinand conquered the Moorish kingdom of
Granada and fought wars over territory in Italy, but they also financed
Columbus and his successors in the hope of extending trade. Henry VIII used
marriage to establish dynastic links with other monarchs, but he also
encouraged the growth of the English wool industry and the navy.
This certainly does not mean these monarchies were any less brutal than
their forebears. They were prepared to use any means to cement their power
against one another and against their subjects. Intrigue, murder, kidnapping and
torture were their stock in trade. Their philosophy is best expressed in the
writings of Machiavelli, the Florentine civil servant whose life’s ambition was
to see Italy unified in a single state and who drew up guidelines by which a
‘prince’ was to achieve this goal. His hopes were frustrated. But his writings
specify a list of techniques which could have been taken straight from the
repertoire of the Spanish monarchs or Henry VIII.
Isabel and Ferdinand followed the conquest of Granada by doing
something the Islamic kingdoms had never done to the Christians—using the
Inquisition to kill those who refused to convert to Christianity or flee the
country. By the beginning of the 17th century the Muslim population, which had
been in the country for 900 years, had been expelled. Jewish people who had
been tolerated through almost eight centuries of Islamic rule were forced to
emigrate, making new lives for themselves in north Africa, in the Turkish-ruled
Balkans (where a Spanish-speaking Jewish community remained in Salonica
until Hitler’s armies took the city in the Second World War) and in eastern
Europe. Even the converts to Christianity, the conversos, were not secure.
There was a wave of persecution against them in the 1570s.
The harsh methods of Henry VII, Henry VIII and their successors in
England were not only directed against the power of the old feudal barons.
They were also directed against vast numbers of the poorest people—those
who were left to roam the country without a livelihood as the barons dismissed
their old armies of retainers and landowners, ‘enclosed’ old common lands and
deprived smallholding peasants of their plots. Successive monarchs treated
them as ‘voluntary criminals’.37 A law of 1530 decreed:
Whipping and imprisonment for sturdy vagabonds. They are to be tied to
cartwheels and whipped until the blood streams from their bodies, and then to
swear an oath to go back to their birthplace or where they have lived for the
last three years and to ‘put themselves to labour’.
The law was later amended:
For the second offence for vagabondage the whipping is to be repeated and
half the ear to be sliced off; but for the third offence the offender is to be
executed as a hardened criminal.38
The new ideas
The period of the ‘discovery’ of America and the ‘new monarchies’ was also
the period of the Renaissance—the ‘rebirth’ of intellectual life and art that
began in the Italian cities and spread, over a century, to the rest of western
Europe. Across the continent there was a rediscovery of the learning of
classical antiquity and, with it, a break with the narrow world view, stultifying
aritistic conventions and religious superstition which characterised the
European Middle Ages. The result was a flowering of art and literature and
scientific advances such as the European world had not known since the times
of Plato, Aristotle and Euclid.
This was not the first attempt to make such a break, despite the claims of
some history books. There had been an earlier breakthrough two centuries
before, with the translation of works from Latin, Greek and Arabic in Toledo,
the efforts of thinkers like Abelard and Roger Bacon, and the writings of
Bocaccio, Chaucer and Dante. But it had ground to a halt with the great crisis
of the 14th century, as church and state worked to extirpate ideas that might link
with the class struggle in town and country. The universities, from being
centres of intellectual exploration, were increasingly characterised by
scholastic disputes which seemed to have no practical relevance.
The Renaissance represented a return to the intellectual, cultural and
scientific endeavours of the 13th century, but on a much higher level and with a
much broader base. In its birthplace in the Italian city states, it did not
immediately challenge head on the sterility of the late medieval world view.
Those states were dominated by merchant oligarchs who flaunted wealth
arrived at by non-feudal means and pushed the members of the old feudal
nobility aside, but who used their wealth and power to secure positions within
the framework established by feudalism. The dominant family in Florence, for
example, was the Medicis. They started off as merchants and bankers, but two
of them ended up as popes and another as the queen of France. The culture they
promoted reflected their contradictory position. They commissioned paintings
and sculptures by craftsmen from plebeian backgrounds who gave brilliant
visual expression to the new society emerging in the midst of the old.
Michelangelo’s ‘God Giving Life to Adam’ or his ‘Last Judgement’ in the
Sistine Chapel are religious works which celebrate humanity. Among his
greatest works is the series of giant statues of slaves or prisoners which show
men struggling to free themselves from the stone in which they are trapped. The
literature encouraged by the oligarchs, on the other hand, was in some ways a
step backwards from the tradition of the 13th and early 14th centuries. As the
Italian revolutionary Gramsci noted nearly 70 years ago, while Dante wrote in
the Italian dialect of the Florentine people, the language of Renaissance
‘humanism’ was that of a thin intellectual elite, Latin. This provided a channel
of communication to scholars across Europe, but not to the mass of people of
Florence, Milan or Venice. What is more, there was still an almost
superstitious reverence for the ancient texts, so that a quotation from a Greek
or Roman author still seemed like the clinching point in an argument.
As the Renaissance spread across Europe, its content began to change.
There was a growing number of translations from the Greek or Latin into
colloquial languages. And there was a growing willingness not simply to read
the ancients, but to challenge their findings—best exemplified by the scientific
advances of Copernicus, Kepler and Galileo. The 16th century may have begun
with the regurgitation of 2,000 year old ideas, but within little more than
another century there was an explosion of new writings in the languages of the
masses—Rabelais in French; Shakespeare, Marlowe and Ben Jonson in
English; Cervantes in Spanish. This was not just a matter of putting stories,
plays or many of the new ideas on to paper. It was also a matter of giving form
to the everyday speech used by millions. The age which saw the ‘new
monarchies’ also saw the first rise of national languages.
The new religions
Twenty five years after Spanish troops took Granada and Columbus landed in
the West Indies, a 34 year old friar and theology teacher, Martin Luther, nailed
a piece of paper to the door of a church in Wittenberg, south Germany. It
contained 95 points (‘theses’) attacking the sale of ‘indulgences’ by the
Catholic church. These were documents which absolved people from their sins
and promised a passport to heaven. His action precipitated the biggest split in
the western church since Constantine had embraced Christianity 12 centuries
before. It seemed that nothing the church or the Holy Roman Empire did could
stop support for Luther growing. The cities of southern Germany and
Switzerland—Basel, Zurich, Strasbourg, Mainz—swung behind him. So did
some of the most powerful German princes, like those of Saxony, Hesse and
Brandenburg. Soon there were converts in Holland and France—despite
countermeasures by the authorities like the burning alive of 14 Lutheran
artisans in the town square of Meaux in 1546.39 Henry VIII of England broke
with the Catholic church after the pope (an ally of the Spanish crown) would
not countenance his divorce from the Spanish princess Catherine of Aragon.
Luther began with theological arguments—over indulgences, over church
ceremonies, over the role of priests as intermediaries between believers and
God, over the right of the pope to discipline the priesthood. But the Catholic
church had been such a central part of medieval society that the issues could
not avoid being social and political. Effectively, what Luther did was
challenge the institution that exercised ideological control on behalf of the
whole feudal order. Those who benefited from that ideological control were
bound to fight back. Disputes over these issues were to plunge most of Europe
into a succession of wars and civil wars over the next century and a quarter—
the Smalkaldic war in Germany, the religious civil wars in France, the long
war of Dutch independence from Spain, the Thirty Years War which devastated
the lands of Germany, and the English Civil War.
Luther was a brilliant polemicist, pouring out tract after tract stating his
case, as well as a translation of the Bible which decisively influenced the
development of the German language. Yet this, in itself, does not explain the
impact of his actions. There was a long tradition of opposition to the Roman
Catholic church based on ideas very similar to Luther’s. There had been an
underground ‘Waldensian’ church with groups in major European cities for 200
years. The Hussites had fought a century before behind very similar ideas in
Bohemia, and there were still many ‘Lollard’ followers of the late 14th century
reformer Wycliffe in England. But these movements had never succeeded in
tearing apart the church and the society within which it existed. Luther did
exactly this, as did other reformers who differed with him on points of doctrine
—Zwingli in Zurich and Calvin in Geneva.
To understand why this happened it is necessary to look at the wider
economic and social changes which had occurred since the crisis of the 14th
century—changes which laid the ground for the new religions, just as they laid
the ground for the new monarchies, the conquests in the new world and the new
learning of the Renaissance. The feudal economy and feudal society were
giving birth to something new, and Protestantism was one of its birth cries.
The economy in transition
West European society had been experiencing slow but cumulative changes
over hundreds of years, changes which were often barely perceptible to those
living through them. First, there was the slow, intermittent, but continual
advance in the techniques of production as artisans, shipbuilders and military
engineers took up innovations arriving from elsewhere in Eurasia and North
Africa and added their own improvements. So by the beginning of the 16th
century there were scores of devices which were unknown in the 12th century
and often even in the 14th—mechanical clocks in every important town,
windmills as well as water mills, blast furnaces capable of producing cast
iron, new ways of building and rigging ships and new devices for establishing
their positions, the cannon and the musket for waging war, the printing press
which provided for the mass copying of texts only previously available as
highly treasured manuscripts in select libraries.
These technical innovations were the absolute precondition for all of the
wider changes. Columbus may have been able to find a way to the Americas
without the astrolabe from the Arab lands and the compass from China—it is
more than possible that others had done so before him—but he would not have
been able to chart the regular sea route that made return visits and the Spanish
conquests possible. The monarchs’ armies would have been able to win one
off battles without their improved crossbows and firearms, but they would not
have been able to defeat the armoured cavalry of knights, flatten the castles of
the lords or defeat peasant pikemen. Renaissance thinkers in northern Italy
would have been able to revive some interest in Greek and Roman writings
without the printing press, but the influence of these writings could not have
spread across most of Europe without their reproduction in thousands of
copies. In the same way, Luther’s challenge to the papacy would not have been
able to find such a huge audience. In fact, the printing press ensured the ground
was already prepared for his ideas. In England, for instance, the printing
houses ensured ‘a delayed but maximum force’ for the anti-clerical arguments
found in Wycliffe, in Langland’s Piers Ploughman and, to a lesser extent in
Chaucer, so that ‘the 14th century invaded the 16th’.40
But the techniques alone could accomplish nothing. They had to be put to
use, sometimes at considerable cost. Weapons had to be manufactured,
minerals mined, printing presses financed, ships built, armies provisioned.
Such things could only be done on the required scale because the social as
well as the technical organisation of production had undergone massive
changes.
In the early feudal period, production had been for immediate use—for
keeping the peasant family alive and for enabling the lord to live in luxury.
What mattered were what Adam Smith and Karl Marx later called ‘use
values’—the necessities of life for the peasant family and luxuries to satisfy
the extravagant tastes of the feudal lord. The pressure to expand production,
either by the peasant working harder or by the use of new techniques, could
only come from the peasant’s desire to live a little better or the lord’s desire to
consume even more extravagantly. As Marx also put it, the level of exploitation
of the peasants was limited by ‘the size of the stomach of the feudal lord’. In
such a society exchange and money played a marginal role. If someone wanted
to build up their wealth, they would grab land rather than hoard gold.
By the beginning of the 15th century things were already very different.
The production of things to sell—to exchange for gold or silver which in turn
could be exchanged for other things—was increasingly prevalent. What Smith
and Marx called ‘exchange value’ became increasingly important. The peasant
family might still produce most of its own food and clothing, but it required
money to pay rent, to buy farming tools and to provide for itself if the harvest
failed. The lords and monarchs required money on a massive scale. Long
distance trade meant exotic luxuries could be obtained from the other end of
the world, at a price. And if someone could obtain enough money, he (or
sometimes she) could acquire an army capable of conquering others (armies
were increasingly made up of mercenaries), or obtain the ships and hire the
sailors necessary for voyages of discovery, trade or piracy. Overall, money
began to become what it is today.
Over time, this would transform the world of work entirely, so that it
ceased to be about meeting human needs and became simply a means by which
those with money could make more money. This process was far from
complete at the beginning of the 16th century. Most artisans would still expect
to receive a customary price for any job and have the freedom to celebrate on
feast days and saints days, and most peasants still saw their work as tied to the
routine of the seasons not the treadmill of the commodity markets. But it was,
nevertheless, under way and had been for a couple of centuries. The slow
spread of the market networks through town and country had encroached on the
lives of growing numbers of people. Close to major towns, ports or navigable
rivers, whole areas of the countryside were being turned over to the production
of ‘industrial crops’—flax for linen, grapes for wine making, olives for oil,
woad or saffron for dyeing—or to herding to meet a growing demand for meat
in the towns and among the upper classes. Merchants were increasingly using
the ‘putting out’ system to pressurise handicraft workers to accept lower
payments based on supply and demand rather than the old customary prices—
and encouraging the growth of new, rurally based industry when, as was often
the case, the urban artisans refused to sacrifice their way of life to the god of
merchant profiteering. In areas like the uplands of south Germany, Bohemia
and Transylvania great financiers like the Fugger family—who financed the
wars of the Spanish and Holy Roman monarchs—were establishing mines
worked by waged labour.
It was the role already played by production for the market which made the
outcome of the crisis of the 14th century very different to that of the crises
which had beset the Roman Empire in the 5th century and China in the 3rd and
13th centuries. On those occasions, famine, civil war and foreign invasion had
produced a fragmentation into great estates, largely cut off economically from
each other and from the wider society. The crisis of the 14th century, by
contrast, was followed by an extension of market relations throughout Europe.
Even where feudal serfdom revived, it was serfdom designed to produce crops
which the lord could sell at a handsome profit to great traders.
The crisis did not destroy the towns. Even though vast numbers of villages
were deserted in the aftermath of the famines and plagues, most towns
remained intact. And by the middle of the 15th century they were in the
forefront of a new economic expansion which was encouraging the use of the
new technologies, like those of printing and shipping. The towns did not all
gain from this new period. The very spread of the market, of production for
exchange instead of for immediate use, meant the fortunes of individual towns
were accident prone. Some that had done very well in the previous period now
suffered a reverse from the impact, through the market, of unforeseeable
changes in production or of political events in distant lands. Others which had
lagged behind now leapt ahead. Barcelona, Florence and the great Hanseatic
trading cities of northern Europe and the Baltic all declined to various degrees
in the 16th century, while other cities in the northern Low Country (the present
day Netherlands), southern Spain, south east Germany and England began to
flourish.
The market had another effect. It transformed the conditions under which
millions lived. After the middle of the 15th century prices began to rise and the
living standards of the mass of people to fall. Real wages, which had often
doubled in the century after the Black Death, fell by between half and two-
thirds from the middle of the 15th century to the end of the 16th,41 while the
peasantry were subject to increased pressures to pay various sorts of dues to
the lords.
There was frenzied money making among the rich of the country and town
alike. The gold lust of Columbus, Cortés and Pizarro was one expression of
this. Another was the church’s trade in indulgences which led to Luther’s first
outburst. So too was the turn to renewed serfdom in eastern Europe and to the
first forms of capitalist farming in parts of western Europe. Money was
becoming the measure of everything. Yet the official values of society were
still those embodied in the hierarchy of the old feudalism.
The church had been absolutely central to the medieval values. Its
ceremonies embodied the behaviour expected of the different classes—often
represented visually in its carvings and stained glass windows. Yet the church
itself was afflicted by the gold lust. Members of great merchant families like
the Medicis or Borgias became popes in order to increase their own wealth,
and expected to pass it on to illegitimate sons. Teenage boys were appointed to
lucrative bishoprics. Clergymen took the incomes from several churches and
expected to appear at none of them. Nobles relied on the tithes paid to the
church for as much as half their income. Priests and monks squeezed
impoverished peasants by lending money at high interest rates, even though
usury was meant to be a sin.
Historians have wasted enormous amounts of time arguing over the exact
interrelation between capitalism and Protestantism. A whole school influenced
by the sociologist (and German nationalist) Max Weber has argued that
Protestant values produced capitalism, without explaining where the alleged
Protestant ‘spirit’ came from.42 Other schools have argued that there is no
connection at all, since many early Protestants were not capitalists and the
most entrenched Protestant regions in Germany included those of the ‘second
serfdom’.43
Yet the connection between the two is very easy to see. The impact of
technical change and new market relations between people within feudalism
led to a ‘mixed society’—‘market feudalism’—in which there was an
intertwining but also a clash between capitalist and feudal ways of acting and
thinking.
The superimposition of the structures of the market on the structures of
feudalism led to the mass of people suffering from the defects of both. The ups
and downs of the market repeatedly imperilled many people’s livelihoods; the
feudal methods of agriculture still spreading across vast areas of eastern and
southern Europe could not produce the yields necessary to feed the peasants as
well as provide the luxuries of the lords and the armies of the monarchs.44 An
expanding superstructure of ruling class consumption was destabilising a base
of peasant production—and as the 16th century progressed, society was
increasingly driven to a new period of crisis in which it was torn between
going forward and going backward.
Every class in society felt confused as a result, and every class looked to
its old religious beliefs for reassurance, only to find the church itself beset by
the confusion. People could only come to terms with this situation if they found
ways to recast the ideas they had inherited from the old feudalism. Luther,
Zwingli, Calvin, John Knox and the rest—and even Ignatius Loyola, who
founded the Jesuits and spearheaded the Catholic Counter-Reformation—
provided them with such ways.
The German Reformation
Martin Luther and Jean Calvin had no intention of starting revolutionary
movements, or even movements for social reform. They were prepared to
make a radical challenge to the established religious order. But, for them, the
arguments were theological—about how the Catholic church had distorted and
corrupted the religious teaching of Jesus and the Apostles as expounded in the
Bible. What mattered, they insisted, was the ‘faith’ of the individual, not the
mediation of priests or ‘good works’—especially those involving payments to
the church. The panoply of Catholic saints, worshipped through statues and
shrines, was nothing short of an idolatrous adulteration of the biblical message,
they insisted. Calvin went even further and held that the belief that worshippers
were somehow consuming the flesh of Jesus during the rite of Holy
Communion was blasphemous—a matter which prevented him conciliating
with the followers of Luther, let alone with the church of Rome. It was over
such questions that the early Protestants were to take great personal risks and
urge their followers to stand firm—even though the punishment for heresy,
enacted in public in cities across Europe, was to be burnt alive.
Yet both Luther and Calvin were conservative on social issues. In 1521
when the imperial authorities were demanding his head, Luther insisted that
people had to obey these authorities on non-religious issues:
Riot has not justification, however justified its causes may be…Secular
authority and the sword have been ordained in order to punish the wicked and
protect the godly…But when…the common man rises, who is incapable of
making the distinction between good and evil, he will hit out
indiscriminatingly, which cannot be without great and cruel injustice. There
take heed and follow the authorities.45
Calvin’s views likewise have been described as ‘a doctrine of popular
obedience’. For it was ‘ordained by God’ that there should be a social order of
rulers and ruled, and ‘because mankind was under original sin this order is
necessarily one of repression’.46
This did not prevent their doctrines unleashing social struggles, however
—struggles in which they had to take sides.
Luther, a friar turned professor who was part of the ‘humanist’ Renaissance
across Europe, could convince individuals from that milieu. He was also able
to win the protection of powerful figures like the elector47 of Saxony,
Frederick, who had his own disputes with the church. But the real reason his
teachings spread rapidly cross southern Germany in the 1520s was their appeal
among the discontented social classes which Luther distrusted. Much the same
applied to the spread of Calvin’s teachings in France a quarter of a century
later.
Historians of the German Reformation today distinguish between different
stages—an ‘urban (or burghers’) Reformation’, a ‘peasant Reformation’ and a
‘princes’ Reformation’.48 The urban Reformation swept through south German
and Swiss cities after Luther became a public figure by defying the emperor at
a famous assembly—the Diet—of the constituent parts of the empire at Worms
in 1521. The cities were run by old established oligarchies, made up of the
families of rich merchants and lesser aristocrats. These had dominated
councils and senates for generations, even where there was some formal
democratic structure. Many of the oligarchies had their own grievances against
the church—for instance, because the clergy claimed immunity from taxation,
forcing others to pay more—and were fearful of the powers of local princes.
But they also had numerous ties to the existing social and religious order. They
lived off feudal rents from land outside the cities, they looked for lucrative
posts in the church for their sons, and they found ways to take a cut from the
church’s tithes. So they were both attracted and repelled by the call for a
‘reformation’ of the church. Typically, they looked to piecemeal change, which
would allow them to exercise greater control over the religious life of the town
and the use of church funds without leading to any great upheaval.
But beneath this social layer were a mass of smaller traders and
craftspeople—and sometimes priests, nuns and monks who came from artisan
families—who were sick of paying for a priesthood which, all too often, was
not even available to provide the religious consolations the church promised. It
was their agitation which carried the Reformation to victory in city after city.
In Erfurt ‘students and artisans’ took part in ‘assaults on the clergy’ and ‘the
destruction of the canon’s house’ after Martin Luther passed through the town in
1521.49 In Basel the weavers demanded the gospel had to be grasped ‘not only
with the spirit but also with the hands’, insisting ‘we should look out for
fellow men with love and true faith’, diverting money spent on adorning
churches to ‘the poor man who in winter lacks wood, candles and other
necessities’.50 In Braunschweig, Hamburg, Hanover, Lemgo, Lübeck,
Magdeburg, Mülhausen and Wismar committees of craftspeople and traders
forced the towns’ ruling bodies to carry through religious changes.51
Wittenberg ‘was riven by conflict and overrun by image-breakers’ until the city
authorities turned to Luther himself to implement an orderly change.52 In
Strasbourg ‘the magistrates, pressed from below by the commune, were
beginning to make changes in religious practice which were clearly illegal, at
the same time hoping what someone—the emperor, the imperial diet, or a
general council of the church—would relieve them from the mounting pressure
for ever greater change’.53 In this way, ‘usually promoted from below, not by
the city government but by the craft guilds’54, two thirds of the imperial cities
of Germany went over to the new religion. Luther ascribed the success of his
doctrine to divine will. ‘The Word did it all,’ he wrote. ‘While I sat drinking
beer with Philip and Amsdorf, God dealt the Papacy a mighty blow’.55 In fact
it was class feeling at a time of endemic economic crisis that spurred the
response to his teaching.
Nevertheless, the ruling councils and senates were usually able to
implement sufficient change to placate the agitation from below: ‘Once the
council had decreed evangelical teaching, had abolished the mass and
absorbed the clergy into the citizen body, it seemed only natural to move
decision making about the city church’s life from the streets into the council
chamber’.56
The Peasant War
Late in 1524 a second, much more violent movement erupted. Known as the
‘Peasant War’ (and among some historians today as the ‘revolution of the
common man’) it has been described as ‘the most important mass uprising of
pre-modern Europe’.57 There had been a succession of local rural revolts
across southern Germany in the previous half century. Now news of the
religious turmoil in the towns, often spread by craftspeople in the burgeoning
rural industries, served as a focus for the bitterness at years of deepening
insecurity and stimulated a revolt that was both religious and social.
Impromptu armies of thousands, even tens of thousands, carried the
movement from one area to another as it swept through southern and central
regions of the empire, sacking monasteries, assaulting castles and attempting to
win over towns.58 The feudal lords and bishops were taken by surprise and
often tried to placate the rebels through local negotiations, while begging the
great princes to come to their aid. The town oligarchies were at a loss to know
what to do. On the one hand, they had their own grievances against rural lords,
bishops and monasteries, and were under pressure from the poorer citizens of
the towns to join the revolt. On the other, they were usually made up of men
who owned land under threat from the revolt. Terrified, they generally stood
aside from the revolt, hoping somehow to negotiate a peace.59
The rebels did manage to take some cities, however, and to swing others to
their side. In Salzburg ‘miners, mining entrepreneurs and peasants joined’ the
uprising.60 ‘In Heilbronn the city magistrates, under pressure from the burghers
and “especially the women” had to open the gates to the rebels’ who occupied
all the convents and clerical establishments.61 In these ways the rebels took
control of such towns as Memmingen, Kaufbeuren, Weinberg, Bermatingen,
Neustadt, Stuttgart and Mülhausen.
Everywhere the rebels drew up lists of grievances, often combining these
into local and regional programmes. One of the lists, comprising 12 points
drawn up by the peasants of the Memmingen region with the help of a
sympathetic artisan and a rebel priest, emerged almost as a national manifesto
of the revolt as it was reprinted again and again.62
It began with the religious demands most important to the mass of people
—the right of local communities to appoint their own pastors and to decide
how to use tithes. But it went on to take up other demands vital for the
peasants’ livelihoods—the abolition of serfdom, the abolition of various fees
payable to the lords, an end to encroachment on common land, an end to lordly
bans on the peasants’ hunting, fishing and wood-gathering, and an end to
arbitrary justice.
This was not a revolutionary programme. It assumed that the nobility and
the princes could be persuaded to accept the peasants’ case. Certainly at the
beginning of the movement, most of its participants seemed to believe that
things would be all right if only they could force the lords to reform their ways.
‘On the whole, the peasants were inclined to accept the nobility, provided it
was willing to submit to their communal associations, the bands or the
Christian Unions [of the rebels]’.63 The conservative historian G R Elton
recounts, ‘On the whole the peasantry…behaved with extraordinary
restraint’.64 From the opposite standpoint, Frederick Engels noted, ‘They
showed remarkable lack of determination in points relating to the attitude…
towards the nobility and the governments. Such determination as was shown
emerged only in the course of the war, after the peasants experienced the
behaviour of their enemies’.65 The ‘moderation’ of the peasants repeatedly led
them to believe those who claimed there could be an amicable settlement of
their differences with the lords.
Yet the most elementary demands of the peasants represented a challenge
to the whole basis on which the princes and the nobility had ruled in the past.
In their religious language the peasants were saying there was now a higher
law than that enacted by the courts. As one village meeting put it, ‘No one but
God, our creator…shall have bondsmen’.66 ‘Godly law’ which represented
peasant interests was to replace the ‘venerable law’ which subjected them to
the lords and the church.
The lordly class was incapable of making concessions that would
undermine its own class position. At the same time as pretending to offer
concessions, the lords began mobilising mercenary armies. In April 1525 these
began to go into action. As Elton admits:
The governing classes were shaken to the core and their reaction was a good
deal more savage than the threat they were fighting…Thousands—some
estimates reckon 100,000—of peasants were killed, mostly in the aftermath of
so called battles that were only routs, the princes’ men-at-arms having great
sport in running down the fugitives.67
Luther was horrified by the rebellion. At first, like the urban oligarchies,
he was critical of the lords for provoking discontent. But once the peasant
armies began to make serious gains he threw in his lot 100 percent with the
lords. He wrote a tract, ‘Against the Murdering, Thieving Hordes of the
Peasants’, which urged the lords to take the most extreme forms of vengeance
against the rebels: ‘They must be knocked to pieces, strangled and stabbed,
covertly and overtly, by everyone who can, just as one must kill a mad dog’.68
He wrote that the princes should ‘not stay your hand…Exterminate, slay, let
whoever has power use it’.69 In a letter he insisted, ‘Better the death of all the
peasants than of princes and magistrates’.70
He was not alone:
Just as the lords interpreted resistance as treason against the state, the
reformers interpreted it as treason against the gospel. Not one failed to take a
stand against the common man in 1515, Martin Luther, Philip Melanchthon,
Johannes Brenz, Urbanus Regius, Zwingli.71
In fact there were Protestant preachers who threw themselves into support
for the uprising. The best known was Thomas Müntzer. A successful
university-trained cleric, he sided with Luther in his first conflicts with the
pope and the emperor. But within three or four years he was criticising Luther
for making concessions. Increasingly his own writings and preaching began to
go beyond religious matters to challenge the oppression of the mass of people.
The fulfilment of Christianity came to mean for him the revolutionary
transformation of the world:
It is the greatest abomination on Earth that no one will relieve the necessities
of the poor…Our sovereigns and rulers are at the bottom of all usury, thievery
and robbery…They oppress the poor husbandmen and craftsmen…If one of
these poor fellows breaks the least jot or tittle of the law he must pay for it. To
all this Dr Liar [Luther] says, ‘Amen’.72
Such words earned Müntzer the wrath of the authorities, and he spent much
of 1524 in hiding, moving through the country setting up small, secret groups of
supporters. Luther urged the princes to take action against him. Even today,
many mainstream historians treat him as a virtual lunatic. For Elton, he was
‘the demonic genius of the early Reformation’, ‘an unrestrained fanatic’ and ‘a
dangerous lunatic’.73 But the only ‘lunatic’ thing about Müntzer was that he
used the biblical language common to almost all thinkers of his time not to
support class rule but to struggle against it.
When the revolt broke, Müntzer made his way to Mülhausen, in the mining
region of Thuringia. There he threw himself into working with radical sections
of the burghers, led by the ex-monk Pfeiffer, to defend the town as a bastion of
the revolution. He was captured, tortured on the rack and beheaded at the age
of 28 after the insurgent army was defeated at Frankenhausen by the Lutheran
Prince of Hesse and the Catholic Duke of Saxony.
The crushing of the revolt had enormous implications for the whole of
German society. It strengthened the position of the great princes immensely.
The lesser knights, who had resented the princes’ growing strength and
dreamed of subordinating them to a united imperial Germany, had sometimes
taken up arms over the religious question, even showing sympathies with the
first stages of the revolt.74 Now they embraced the princes as the guarantors of
the continued exploitation of the peasantry. Likewise, the urban oligarchies,
after vacillating initially, saw in the princes their ultimate protection against
rebellion. Even the lesser burghers had little difficulty in reconciling
themselves to the victors over a revolt they had been too cowardly to support.
But in accepting the new, enhanced power of the princes, the urban upper
and middle classes were also accepting that their interests would not dictate
the future pattern of German society. The crisis which developed as elements
of capitalism grew within feudalism had led to a revolutionary upsurge. But the
revolt was crushed, just as the revolts of the previous period of great crisis, in
the 14th century, had been crushed across Europe. The urban middle classes,
even while embracing the new religious ideology of Protestantism, were not
prepared to use it to rally the most exploited classes in an onslaught on the old
order. So the peasants were smashed and the urban middle classes left
powerless in the face of the growing power of the princes.
German Protestantism was one victim of this cowardice. Lutheranism, by
urging the princes on, made itself their historic prisoner. Luther’s original
doctrines had undermined the hold of the church over its parishioners by
arguing their equality in worship. But the Lutherans’ fear of revolt led them to
reintroduce the old discipline. As one of Luther’s closest collaborators,
Melanchthon, wrote in the aftermath of 1525, ‘It is necessary for such wild and
uncouth people as the Germans to have less freedom than they have now’.75 It
was the princes who would administer such discipline. Lutheranism became a
double weapon for them after the defeat of the rebellion. On the one hand they
could wave it against the Catholic emperor who sought to encroach on their
power, and on the other use it to keep an ideological hold on the classes they
exploited. So it was that a religion which had arisen in reaction to the crisis of
German feudalism became the official faith in areas of north and east Germany
where peasants were forced back into serfdom—just as Christianity itself had
developed as a reaction to the crisis of the Roman Empire, only to turn into the
ideology of that empire. Meanwhile, the peasants of southern and central
Germany no longer saw any reason to embrace a Protestantism which had lined
up with the oppressors in 1525.
This left the towns of southern Germany under increased pressure from the
emperor and the Catholic princes of the region to abandon the new religion.
The urban oligarchies looked to Protestant princes to protect them. But this
only drew them into the essentially feudal and dynastic wars of such princes.
When the alliance was put to the test in the ‘Smalkaldic’ war with the emperor
in 1546, the Protestant princes were not even prepared to fight seriously,
leaving the Protestant cities to face the wrath of the victorious Catholic armies.
From this point on, Protestantism only survived in the southern cities on
sufferance, its decline reflecting the urban middle classes’ loss of
independence.
The French wars of religion
The story of the Reformation in France is very much a rerun, 30 years later, of
events in Germany. Economic crisis led to the impoverishment of peasants,
artisans and wage earners, to repeated famines, outbreaks of plague and, in
1557, state bankruptcy. Individuals from all social classes turned against the
church, the largest property holder, and the grip of a handful of aristocratic
families.76 Protestantism had a cross-class appeal. But, as Henry Heller has
shown, ‘in so far as it was a mass movement, it was the small-scale
manufacturers, lesser merchants and craftsmen who constituted its rank and
file’.77 The same point was made by the great French novelist Balzac a century
and a half ago, when he noted:
Religious reform…found partisans chiefly among those of the lower classes
who had begun to think. The great nobles encouraged the movement only to
serve interests quite foreign to the religious question…But among artisans and
men employed in trade, faith was genuine, and founded on intelligent
interests.78
Jean Calvin was from a middle class French family, although forced by
persecution to live in Geneva, and framed a worldview even more suited to
this class than Luther’s. Luther had initially preached against the discipline of
the church and then succumbed to the discipline of the princes. Calvin, by
contrast, stressed the discipline of a new sort of church, run by the urban
middle classes themselves. He made his followers feel they were God’s elect
and they tried to prove this by being more sober, self controlled and
abstemious than their fellows. Such attitudes appealed perfectly to the
respectable artisan or shopkeeper family, cut off from the world of aristocratic
luxury but frightened and contemptuous of the ‘dissolute’ poor below them.
As Heller has put it:
Some townsmen…could see that the mass of humankind was falling back into
poverty, that the material, indeed, the cultural advances of a century were once
again in jeopardy. Rightly they judged the fault lay with an ecclesiastical and
feudal order that wasted the wealth of society in war, luxury and splendour.
Their revolt became an attempt to defend themselves against both those who
controlled the system and those who most opposed it. One way to do so was
through an ideology of work, asceticism and discipline.79
Calvin was socially conservative, seeing the existing order of society as
ordained by God. But his call for religious reformation necessarily had social
implications. It ‘entailed a major advance for the urban bourgeoisie, involving
not simply a degree of economic liberation but also the transfer of hegemony in
the realm of religion to them’.80 This was not a call for a revolutionary
reconstitution of the state: the urban middle classes were still too weak for
that. But it did imply fundamental reforms and would have protected their
interests in the midst of a social crisis.
Calvin’s social moderation failed to achieve even these reforms when the
crisis in society became most intense in the late 1550s. A section of the
nobility began to attack the privileges of the church hierarchy and two of the
great aristocratic families, the Bourbons and the Montmorencys, fought bitterly
over the succession to the throne with the third great family, the fanatically
Catholic Guises.
The middle classes had the possibility of taking advantage of the splits in
the nobility to unite the peasants and urban poor behind them in the struggle for
reform. The peasants were certainly bitter enough and had their own traditions
of dissent and anti-clericalism. But on Calvin’s advice the radical section of
the middle class tied their fate to the dissident section of the aristocracy. When
peasants reacted to the intense poverty of the mid-1550s with religious
processions, involving ‘chanting the liturgy of the saints’ and some self
flagellation, the urban middle classes did their best to clear them from the
towns. ‘Calvinists were appalled at the ignorance, superstition and sensuality
of the rural folk’, while the peasants were repelled by ‘Calvinist asceticism’
and ‘remained attached to their saints, miracles and masses, to their dances,
festivals and alcohol’.81
The crisis culminated in a series of bloody religious wars in the 1560s—
including the famous Bartholomew’s Day massacre of Protestant notables in
Paris.82 The Calvinist strategy of reliance on the nobles meant these were
fought essentially along feudal lines ‘by armies led and composed in the large
part by nobles’,83 while the social issues were forgotten. This played into the
hands of the defenders of the old order, since there were twice as many
Catholic as Protestant nobles.
The basic issues must soon have been obscured for many participants in
the civil wars—just as they have been obscured for many historians who do
not see any element of class conflict in them.84 The behaviour of the Calvinist
princes—who could be just as money grabbing, dissolute and ‘immoral’ as
their Catholic rivals—can only have disheartened many of the Calvinist middle
class,85 while the contemptuous attitude of the Calvinists to the poor allowed
the Catholics to organise riots in Paris. As so often in history, the leaders of an
opposition current believed it was ‘practical politics’ to put their faith in a
section of the old rulers—and suffered bitter defeat as a result.
The Calvinists’ chosen champion, Henry of Navarre, finally took the throne
by turning his back on Protestantism and the Protestants were restricted to
certain fortified cities before being driven from the country a century later. The
defeat for the middle class was not as total or as catastrophic as in Germany.
There was still some advance of industry and trade, and successful
businessmen were able to prosper. Some were able to buy their way into a
new aristocracy (the noblesse de robe) or to marry off their children to
members of the old aristocracy (the noblesse d’epée). But for another two and
a half centuries they had to live in a society which accepted the repression, the
wasteful expenditure and the posturing of the aristocracy. As so often in
history, the price of ‘moderation’, ‘respectability’ and ‘realism’ was defeat.
Chapter 3
The birth pangs of a new order
Calvinism was not defeated everywhere. Calvin himself was welcomed by the
burghers of the city state of Geneva. He became the dominant intellectual and
political force in the city and imposed a new religious orthodoxy which could
be every bit as bigoted as the old. In 1547, a Jacques Gruet was executed for
‘blasphemy’ and ‘atheism’ in 1553, a Spanish refugee, Servetus, was burned
alive for ‘heresy’. Calvin also imposed his own discipline of hard work
through public denunciations, banishments and whippings. Laws banned
adultery and blasphemy, and enforced compulsory school attendance. It was a
regime many respectable burghers found irksome. But it did provide ideal
conditions for money-making.
The example of Geneva inspired others in Europe. Even in a place like
Scotland, where the economy was backward and the urban middle class
relatively weak, Calvinism could have an intellectual appeal to those who
wanted somehow to take society forward. The preacher John Knox was able to
draw together a disparate group of aristocrats and a weak burgher class in
opposition to the Catholic Queen Mary Stuart. Most significantly, in the
Netherlands it provided the banner beneath which the burghers of prosperous
towns rose alongside local princes in revolution against Spanish rule.
The Dutch Revolt
The area which today makes up Belgium and Holland had passed into the
hands of the Spanish crown in the 15th century. This did not cause any
particular antagonism among the local population at first, for this was before
the era of modern nationalism. The feudal lords gained from serving a great
emperor—until 1555 the Flemish-born Charles V. The urban middle classes
also benefited, using Spanish wool in their textile industries and profiting from
the export of manufactured goods to Spain’s American empire. Silver and gold
flowed in from the colonies, passed through the coffers of the Spanish crown,
and ended up in the pockets of Low Country merchants. The Castilian heart of
Spain, rich and powerful in the 15th century, entered a centuries-long era of
economic stagnation, while the Netherlands became the most economically
dynamic part of Europe.
The Spanish crown had used its control of the country’s Catholic hierarchy,
and especially the Inquisition, to stamp on opposition to its rule since the
1490s. Philip II, ruler from the mid-1550s, took this process a step further,
seeing it as his mission to fight heresy and Protestantism right across Europe,
to impose everywhere a Catholic ideology which fitted the increasing
backwardness of Castile’s economy. In Spain this meant attacking the autonomy
of Catalonia and suppressing the remaining Moorish minority. In the Low
Countries it meant an onslaught on the local aristocracy and the growing
Protestant minorities among the urban classes. This was accompanied by
increased taxation for the mass of people at a time of economic crisis and
growing hardship.
The first wave of revolt came in the late 1560s, just as the religious wars
were being waged in France. Calvinism spread from the southern to the
northern cities, accompanied by a wave of ‘iconoclasm’—the destruction of
religious images and the sacking of churches. Spain’s Duke of Alba crushed the
revolt, marching into Brussels with an army of 10,000 and executing thousands
—including the Catholic Count of Egmont who, like the rest of the local
aristocracy, would not countenance armed resistance. There was a second
revolt a decade later, which proved successful in the north, where it received
the backing of certain nobles—the most important of whom was the Prince of
Orange—and established an independent state, the United Provinces (later
known as the Dutch Republic). Its towns and its trade were to prosper
enormously. For more than a century it was the most economically dynamic
part of Europe, supplanting Portugal in the East Indies colonies and even
threatening Portugal’s control of Brazil. By contrast, the southern nobles
abandoned the struggle, allowing the Spanish army to reconquer the towns.
Places such as Ghent, Bruges and Antwerp, which had been in the forefront of
economic development for 300 years, now entered into a long period of
stagnation.
The Thirty Years War
The fighting between the Netherlands and Spain came to a halt with a 12 year
truce in 1609. But before the truce had expired another great religious war had
broken out several hundred miles to the east. It was to rage for 30 years over
much of the area between the Rhine and the Baltic, causing devastation and a
massive loss of life. Germany’s population was around a third lower at the end
than it had been at the beginning.
Anyone reading about this war today is bound to be confused by its
kaleidoscopic character. Alliances formed and disintegrated. One day the
fighting was at one end of Europe, the next several hundred miles away. No
sooner did one issue seem resolved than another arose. Whole armies changed
sides. Many thousands of combatants saw the war as about religious principles
for which they were prepared to die, yet Protestant princes supported a
Catholic emperor at one stage, while at another the pope and Catholic France
supported the Protestant king of Sweden. The ablest commander of the war
was assassinated by his own generals at the behest of his own ruler. The only
constant features seem to be the rampaging mercenary armies, the looted
villages, the hungry peasants and the burning towns—a world brilliantly
portrayed in Bertolt Brecht’s epic anti-war play Mother Courage. No wonder
the war has been the cause of as much controversy among historians as any in
history.86 Yet it is possible to find a certain pattern through the fog of events.
Spain was still the greatest power in Europe in the 1610s. Its rulers, one
branch of the Habsburg family, still looked to a ruthless imposition of Catholic
doctrine as a way to cement their power in all the lands of the crown—not just
Castile, but also the other Iberian kingdoms of Aragon (especially Catalonia)
and Portugal (which they had managed to acquire), the Americas (where they
had been thrown briefly on to the defensive by a powerful ‘Indian’ rebellion in
Chile), major parts of Italy (including the duchy of Milan and the kingdom of
Naples), and the southern Netherlands. They were also preparing for war to
reconquer the northern Netherlands.
Closely allied to the Spanish crown was the other branch of the Habsburg
family, the emperors of the ‘Holy Roman Empire of the German nation’. They
dreamed of turning their empire into a huge, centralised monarchy embracing
all Europe from the Atlantic to the border with the Ottoman Turks. But, for the
moment, most of the empire was run by powerful, independent princes. The
emperors’ only real power lay in their own Austrian lands, and even here it
was strongly circumscribed by the ‘estates’—representatives of the lords,
knights and urban oligarchies. These insisted on their right to decide
fundamental questions of policy, and in the biggest part of the Austrian domains
—the kingdom of Bohemia—claimed the power to choose a king who might
not be a Habsburg. A growing faction within the imperial court came to see a
Spanish-style impostion of religious comformity as the way to crush resistance
to imperial power.
There had been a hardening of Catholic doctrine and organisation with the
‘Counter-Reformation’ of the 1560s. The church’s Council of Trent had finally
agreed a common doctrine which all Catholic clerics were meant to inculcate.
A new religious order, the Jesuits, based itself upon a sense of discipline, a
religious zeal and an intellectual rigour very different to the corruption and
laxity that had characterised so much of the church in the past. It became the
vanguard in fighting Protestantism, especially within the ranks of Europe’s
upper class, forming networks of aristocratic adherents in every city where it
was able to operate.
Counter-Reformation Catholicism suited Spain’s rulers admirably. The
colonisation of Europe’s ruling class by the Jesuits was also a way of
supplementing Spanish military power with ideological power. This process,
once under way, had a logic of its own. The papal laxity of the early 16th
century had been that of a church hierarchy that was on occasions cultivated as
well as corrupt, allowing Renaissance thought and art to flourish. The first
generation of Jesuits inherited some of the Renaissance tradition, gaining
repute for their educational role and their concern for charity.87 Yet the
Counter-Reformation, and the Jesuits especially, were soon characterised by a
clampdown not just on outright ‘heresy’, but on any critical thought. The
papacy banned all the writings of the great religious scholar Erasmus and all
translations of the Bible into living languages. Soon even the archbishop of
Toledo, who had played a leading part in the Council of Trent, was being
persecuted for ‘heresy’ by the Inquisition.88 The Jesuits became notorious for
being prepared to justify any policy of their aristocratic followers on the
grounds that the ‘ends’ of bringing people to salvation justified any ‘means’.
There was ‘the triumph within the Society of Jesus of a cult of irrational and
monolithic authority, with the subordination of the personality in the service of
a monstrous organism’.89
Counter-Reformation Catholicism and the two wings of the Habsburg
dynasty shared one great enemy—the liberated, anti-Habsburg, Protestant
northern Netherlands. As the Czech historian Polisensky has put it, ‘Europe
[was] riven within itself…the liberated Netherlands on the one hand, the
Spaniards on the other, had become the two focuses for a gathering of forces
which affected the whole of the continent’.90
Yet the war did not break out on the frontier of the Netherlands, but 400
miles away in Bohemia. The kingdom of Bohemia, embracing the present day
Czech Republic and Silesia, was of central importance to the Holy Roman
Empire. It was the biggest single state in the empire and the home of the
imperial courts for much of the second half of the 16th century. But it was an
anomaly in an empire increasingly under the influence of the Counter-
Reformation ideology sweeping in from Spain, with its glorification of kingly
power and its fear of dissent of any sort. Bohemia was characterised both by
the power of the non-kingly estates and by toleration for a multiplicity of
different religious groupings that had persisted since the settlement of the
Hussite wars 170 years before. As well as Catholics, there were
‘ultraquists’,91 Lutherans and Calvinists. This was an affront to the whole
ideology of the Counter-Reformation, just as the power of the estates was an
affront to the imperial dream of establishing a centralised German monarchy
along the lines of that in Spain.
The immediate cause of the war was the attempt to clamp down on
religious freedom in the kingdom. The imperial authorities began to pull down
Protestant churches, arrest some well known Protestants, censor printed
material and ban non-Catholics (90 percent of the population) from civic
office. When representatives of the Protestant estates complained, the emperor
rejected the protests and declared meetings of the estates illegal. The estates
retaliated with fury, with the famous ‘Defenestration of Prague’ of 1618—when
they threw imperial officials out of a window 60 feet up (only a muck heap
saved them from serious injury)—and replaced the Habsburg Ferdinand as
king of Bohemia with a Protestant prince from Germany, Frederick of the
Palatinate.
The Habsburgs saw the clash with the Bohemian estates as the first round
in a bigger battle with the northern Netherlands and their allies. But behind this
was an even deeper struggle—between two different ways of responding to the
changes all of Europe had been experiencing as the market transformed the old
feudalism.
This does not mean that the Bohemian estates stood in some crude way for
‘capitalism’ or the ‘bourgeoisie’ against feudalism. The estates represented
three layers of society—not only the burghers, but also (and with more
influence than them) the two feudal groupings of the great lords and the knights.
Even the burghers’ representatives were not wholly bourgeois, since they often
owned land which they ran along feudal lines. But as Polisensky has shown,
changes were taking place which undermined the feudal character of rural life
in areas of Bohemia. Many landowners, nobles and burghers were replacing
serf labour or rent in kind by fixed money rents, growing industrial crops, and
encouraging the growth of small towns and forms of handicraft production on
their lands. There was an incentive to improve methods of production in
agriculture and industry, and a spread of ‘free’ wage labour. The unfree labour
a peasant had to provide could be as low as one day a year. Feudalism was far
from finished across Bohemia as a whole. But there was a compromise
between it and new, embryonically capitalist, forms of production. As
Polisensky puts it, ‘The whole great edifice of feudal obligation, both personal
and occupational, was being undermined by a series of pressures which tended
in their different ways to liberate production from its fetters’.92 The result was
that Bohemia was economically dynamic and did not suffer, at least until the
1590s, the economic stagnation and peasant impoverishment of the adjoining
German lands.
The estates system of government, with its careful balancing of different
interests and religious tolerance, provided a framework within which such
economic change could occur slowly and peacefully. Members of all three
estates could see reasons to defend a structure which allowed them to coexist
peacefully and profitably. Even some of the greatest feudal magnates found
themselves resisting forces which aimed to drive all of Europe back to
feudalism.
However, that was not the end of the story, as the course of the war
showed. Some of the magnates moved to the side of the empire and the
Counter-Reformation in the run up to the war, producing converts for the
Jesuits. Even those nobles who were steadfast in their allegiance to the
Bohemian cause conceived of the war along their own class lines, causing
discontent among the burghers which weakened the war effort. Observers at
the court of the Protestant king ‘were astounded by the indifference or cruelty
shown by Frederick and his entourage towards the “wretched peasants”.’93
Only one leading figure, the Austrian Tschernembi, argued that if ‘the serfs are
freed and serfdom abolished…Common people will be willing to fight for
their country’.94 He was overruled.
Although the Bohemian armies twice advanced on the imperial capital of
Vienna, they were forced to retreat each time, as enemy armies found little
obstacle to their own advance through Bohemian lands. Finally, after the
Bohemian army suffered a major defeat in 1620 at the Battle of the White
Mountain, the Protestant king and the noble generals fled the country rather than
fall back on Prague to mount further resistance. The war was lost, not because
the Bohemian estates lacked the means to defeat the empire, but because the
class interests of their leaders prevented them utilising those means.
Bohemia’s leaders had relied on Protestant rulers elsewhere in Europe
leaping to their defence. They were sorely disappointed. The Protestant Union
of German princes withdrew from the war before the Battle of the White
Mountain. The Dutch and the English governments (the Bohemian King
Frederick was married to a daughter of James I of England) refused to begin
wider hostilities against Spain. As increasingly successful commercial
powers, they put their battles for trade above their supposed religious
commitments. Yet keeping out of the Bohemian war did not stop either the
German Protestant princes or the Dutch suffering its consequences. The
Spanish crown, exultant at its victory, went on to conquer the Palatinate
territories which lay between some of its territories and its next goal, the
Netherlands. This forced the Dutch and the English to take action of their own
—supplying finance and troops to fight in the Palatinate. It also threatened to
alter the balance of power of Europe to the detriment of both the German
princes and the monarchies of France and Sweden. Hence by the late 1630s
Catholic France and Lutheran Sweden were the allies of Calvinist Holland,
and they were backed by the pope, who feared growing Spanish influence in
Italy as a threat to his own papal territories.
At one point the empire seemed on the verge of victory, with its armies
commanded by a Bohemian magnate, Wallenstein, who had converted to
Catholicism. But Wallenstein was not just hated by the Bohemian Protestants
he had betrayed. He also terrified the Catholic princes of Germany, as he
seemed about to establish an empire that would nullify their independent
power, and he antagonised the protagonists of complete Catholicisation of the
empire, since he resisted their demands to return to the social conditions of
200 years before. His experience in managing the huge estates he had amassed
in Bohemia and elsewhere—partly with the help of a Protestant banker of
Dutch nationality, De Witte95—impressed on him the importance of newer
forms of economic organisation and, with them, a certain degree of religious
toleration.96 He put up resistance, albeit half-hearted, to the demands of the
ultras, was twice dismissed as head of the army and was finally murdered by
assassins acting for the emperor.97 As Polisensky has noted, ‘In the last
analysis it was more than personal hatreds…that lay behind Wallenstein’s
downfall: the fundamental issue was his economic system versus the extreme
advocates of feudal absolutism’.98
But the methods of the ultras could not lead to victory in the war. It
dragged on for another 14 years after the death of Wallenstein, with ever-
shifting permutations of alliances increasingly centred around the rival
absolute monarchies of Spain and France. By the end of the war few of the
active participants could remember its beginning, and even these could hardly
recognise any remnant of the original issues. All that was visible was the
devastation of Germany and the economic cost elsewhere. Peace was finally
agreed through the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, against a background of
social and political unrest in virtually all the combatants—a revolt of
Catalonia and Portugal within the Spanish Empire, a clash between the Orange
prince and the merchants of the northern Netherlands, the beginning of the
political revolts in France known as the ‘Fronde’.
The war had damaged both of the initial combatants. Bohemia was
subjugated to a devastating and deadening feudal absolutism. The land was
now in the hands of lords who cared only for grabbing as much of the produce
as possible, regardless of productivity. The interest in new techniques which
had characterised the 16th century died as the peasants were compelled to
devote up to half their working time to unpaid labour.99 The towns,
depopulated by the wars, stagnated under the impact of debt and physical
destruction. What had been one of the centres of European culture became a
provincial backwater. A symbol of the change was that the Czech language was
forced into obscurity for 200 years, hanging on only in the countryside while
German came to predominate in the towns.100 The clash between the new ways
of making a livelihood and old sets of social relations had been resolved in
Bohemia by the forcible and extremely bloody destruction of the new by the
old. A terrible price was paid for the failure of revolutionary initiative in the
first years of the war.
The Spanish crown also lost much. Even before the war there had been
signs of economic deterioration in Castile. But military power seemed to paper
these over. By 1648 this was no longer the case. The crown had lost Portugal.
It could hold down Catalonia and its empire in Latin America, the Philippines,
parts of Italy and the southern Netherlands. But increasingly the benefits of
empire flowed elsewhere, while the Iberian Peninsula became one of the
backward parts of Europe.
The German princes were among the victors of the war, in that they were
able to exercise independent power even more at its end than at its beginning.
But the mass of German people paid a price for this. The patchwork of
fragmented realms, cut off from each other by customs posts and continually
engaged in dynastic plots against one another, provided no basis for
overcoming the extreme economic and social dislocation caused by the war.
Southern Germany had been one of the most urbanised and economically
advanced areas in Europe in the early 16th century—it certainly was not in the
late 17th.101
France emerged from the Thirty Years War as it had emerged from the
religious wars of the previous century—with its monarchy strengthened
(despite the short term turmoil of the Fronde), with a very slow growth of
economic centralisation and a snail’s pace adoption of the forms of economic
organisation that broke with the old feudal ways. Its rulers gained a little from
the war, the mass of its people nothing.
The only real ‘gain’ from the war was that the independent Dutch republic
survived and its new ruling class, based upon capitalist methods, thrived.
Through all the smoke of a century and quarter of Reformation and the
devastation of religious wars and civil wars, one small part of Europe had
seen the establishment of a state based upon a new way of organising economic
life. As the Peace of Westphalia was signed, a similar transformation was
being pushed to completion by violent methods but at far less cost just across
the North Sea.
The English Revolution
In January 1649 an executioner’s axe cut off the head of the king of England
and Scotland, Charles I. The event shocked the whole of Europe.102 Rulers
throughout the continent—Catholic, Lutheran and Calvinist—severed
diplomatic relations with the English government.103 It had committed
sacrilege against a principle they shared—the right of some to rule over others
because of an accident of birth.
The men who ordered the execution were far from being extreme
republicans. Only 20 months before, their leader Oliver Cromwell had
defended the principle of monarchy, saying that ‘no man could enjoy their lives
and estates quietly without the king had his rights’.104 Now he famously
declared, ‘We will cut off his head with his crown on it.’ He was, despite
himself, opening the door to a new era, which would question the assumption
that some human beings were divinely ordained to superiority over others.
There are fashionable accounts of the English Revolution which see it as a
result of mere jockeying for position between rivals within a homogenous
‘gentry’ elite. Such accounts chart the patronage and family connections which
tie one upper class figure to another and explain the battles and beheadings as
flowing from a process of plotting and counter-plotting which got out of hand.
Such interpretations fail to see that 1649 was not some historical quirk. It
was a product of the clash between the same social forces which had been
tearing much of Europe apart for a century and a half—forces unleashed as
market relations arose out of and transformed the old feudal order. It involved
not just rival upper class courtiers and politicians, but merchant interests
similar to those prominent in the Dutch revolt; it involved artisans and small
traders like those who had carried the Reformation through south Germany or
been burned at the stake in France; and it involved peasant protests, much
smaller in scale but not different in kind to the German Peasant War of 1525.
Binding together the parties in the English Civil War were the rival religious
notions thrown up by the European Reformation.
Peaceful prelude
The Reformation in England had, like the ‘princely reformations’ in parts of
Germany, been carried through by royal decree. Henry VIII had broken with the
Roman Catholic church for diplomatic reasons and bound the majority of the
English ruling class to his policy by selling former monastery lands at knock-
down prices.
But there was more to the Reformation in England than just princely self
interest and upper class greed. It sank roots among all those open to a new
worldview which seemed to make sense of the changing society, especially
among the trader and artisan classes but also among some of the landed gentry.
The gap which separated the Reformation from above and the Reformation
from below in England was blurred through the latter half of the 16th century.
The bitter experience of an attempt to reimpose the old Catholicism by force
under Mary Tudor (married to Philip II of Spain) caused lordly recipients of
church lands to stand shoulder to shoulder with Puritan burghers in support of
her successor, the Protestant Queen Elizabeth I.
This was encouraged by slow but continuous economic change, although
England was still one of the more economically backward countries of Europe.
The population more than doubled between 1500 and 1650.105 By the end of
this period more than one person in 12 lived in towns. The output of handicraft
industries—especially textiles—soared, as did mining and iron-making. Many
thousands of people came to be employed in rural industries, as well as in the
towns, until 60 percent of households in the Forest of Arden were involved in
cloth production and there were 100,000 country people engaged in knitting
stockings.106 The proportion of land in the hands of the better off farmers, the
‘yeomen’ who supplemented family labour by employing waged labour, grew
substantially. And a minority of the gentry began to discover there were better
and more secure long term incomes to be gained by granting long leases to
yeomen—who would employ waged labour and improve the land—rather than
driving small peasants below the subsistence level.
Society still displayed numerous feudal features. Many of the gentry and
aristocrats squeezed the peasants dry. Although serfdom had disappeared at the
time of the Black Death, they could still extract numerous feudal payments. The
bulk of the land was still tilled by small and medium peasants, not by capitalist
farmers using waged labour. Artisans, rather than wage labourers, still
dominated in most industries. The gentry were still as likely to look to
supplement their incomes through handouts from the royal court—which in turn
came from taxes—as by improving their landholdings. And the most powerful
merchants relied upon monopolies granted by the monarch, which raised prices
for everyone else and discouraged other industries. Yet from the mid-1550s to
the mid-1610s the arrangements, like those in Bohemia before the Thirty Years
War, allowed slow economic advance and, with it, the slow germination of the
new capitalist methods.
There were religious rows with political overtones during this period. The
last part of Elizabeth’s reign saw the persecution and emigration of some
‘Puritan’ Calvinists, and the advent of James VI of Scotland to the English
throne as James I witnessed an aborted conspiracy (the ‘Gunpowder Plot’)
involving some of the rump of large Catholic landowners. But by and large the
period was marked by a high degree of consensus between the monarchy, the
large landowners, the gentry, the hierarchy of the national church and the
merchants. This was expressed by a constitutional setup in which the king
appointed ministers to decide policies, but depended for their implementation
and financing upon the support of the two ‘houses’ of parliament—the House of
Lords, made up of the great aristocrats and the bishops, and the House of
Commons, made up of representatives of the landowning ‘gentry’ of each
county and the burghers of the urban boroughs.
The state machine was much weaker than in France or Castile. There was
no standing army, no national police structure, and only a rudimentary civil
service. Real power in each locality lay with the gentry, who administered
much of the law, imposed punishments on the labouring classes, ensured most
taxes were collected and raised troops when the occasion demanded. The
monarchy’s power depended on its ability to persuade or to cajole the gentry to
do what it wanted. But this was easily done so long as there was broad
agreement on policies to be pursued.
The road to war
Things began to fall apart in the later 1610s under James I and, more seriously,
in the late 1620s under his son Charles I. A gap opened up between the
demands of the monarchy for money and the willingness of the parliamentary
gentry and merchant classes to provide it through taxes. The monarchy further
embittered parliament by seeking sources of revenue outside its control—new
taxes and customs duties, and the selling of lordly titles and monopolies over
certain sorts of trade. Parliament threatened to deny any regular funding until it
was granted control over such measures, and the crown tried governing
without it, using special courts such as the ‘Star Chamber’ to punish those who
resisted. This in turn increased the distrust of the monarchy—or, at least, of
‘advisers’ like Buckingham in the 1610s and 1620s and Strafford in the 1630s.
The dispute increasingly took on a religious coloration. The gentry and
merchants tended to identify with the Protestant forces in the Thirty Years War,
out of a mixture of deep-felt religious convictions and crude economic
calculations. The merchants reckoned that any weakening of Spanish influence
would translate into easier access to American and East Indian markets. James
and Charles were pulled in the other direction, towards alliances with the
great Catholic monarchies—with Charles marrying the daughter of the French
king, who was attacking Protestants in the town of La Rochelle. Charles’s
Archbishop of Canterbury, Laud, purged Calvinist ministers, used the church
courts against religious dissenters and ordered the clergy to proclaim non-
payment of the king’s taxes was irreligious. In effect, the church hierarchy
began to act as if it was part of the civil service, a ‘moral’ police force acting
on the behalf of the king.
Sections of the gentry and merchants began to fear they would suffer the
fate of many European Protestants and drown in the wave of Royalist Counter-
Reformation sweeping the continent. The fear grew after a clash between the
Commons and the king in the late 1620s, when he imprisoned five knights for
refusing to pay taxes and dispensed with parliament. A powerful Catholic
group centred on the king’s French wife and her Jesuit adviser emerged at
court, and the king’s favourite, Strafford, established a permanent Irish army
made up of Catholics.
The king’s hardline approach seemed to be working. Then in 1637 he
overstepped the mark. He attempted to impose a new non-Calvinist prayer
book in Scotland—which he ruled was a separate country with its own
political institutions, legal structure and church. A Scottish ‘convention’ of
nobles, lawyers, Calvinist ministers and burghers raised an army of revolt. The
king confidently set out to crush it, only to discover he could not raise the
necessary finance. As Scottish forces moved into northern England he was
forced to summon his first parliament for 11 years.
The gentry, the borough representatives and even many of the lords who
gathered at Westminster were in no mood simply to grant the king’s requests
without obtaining a great deal in return. In the main, they were conservative in
their political attitudes. But for them, conservatism meant maintaining their
own position as the rulers of the localities, and that position had been under
threat from the king for 11 years. The majority took their lead from figures like
John Pym—secretary of a company whose ambition was to break the Spanish
stranglehold on trade with Latin America and the Caribbean. They demanded
redress for their grievances: abolition of the new taxes and a pardon for non-
payers; dissolution of the special courts; an end to the king’s power to dissolve
parliament without its consent; the trial and execution of the chief royal adviser
Strafford; the removal of the bishops from the House of Lords; and an amicable
peace with the Scottish Calvinists.
The king made some concessions—for instance, the trial of Strafford. But
he could not accept the platform as a whole. It would have meant the monarchy
giving up most of the powers it had acquired over hundreds of years. Without
them, the king would be little more than a figurehead at a time when across
Europe his fellow monarchs were increasing, not diminishing, their powers.
As time passed, the king found his position improving. Many in the
Commons and the majority in the Lords were reluctant to take a radical stance
against him, lest it encourage others to challenge their power. A ‘king’s party’
grew among a section of the gentry and the aristocracy, especially in areas of
the north and west, where remoteness from the influence of the London market
had left many feudal customs intact. Even in more economically advanced
areas the king had the backing of those of the gentry who gained financially
from royal favours, from those great merchants benefiting from the royal
monopolies (for instance, the East India Company) and from people of all
social classes inculcated with the habits of deference established over many
generations.
By January 1642 the king felt powerful enough to try to seize total power
in a coup. He descended on parliament with 400 armed supporters, intent on
arresting five of the most prominent MPs. But they had already fled a mile
away to the security provided by the merchants, tradesmen and apprentices of
the City of London.
When the king entered the City in pursuit the next day, an eyewitness told,
‘The king had the worst day in London that he ever had, the people crying,
“Privilege of Parliament” by thousands…shutting up all their shops and
standing at their doors with swords and halberds’.107 Rumours that the king
was going to return to the City with his armed ‘cavaliers’ ‘brought huge
crowds into the streets with whatever arms they could lay hands on: women
provided hot water to throw on the invaders; stools, forms and empty tubs
were hurled into the streets to “intercept the horse”.’108
The events were portentous. The king had failed to establish his absolute
power by a simple police action. Within a week he had left London, intent on
raising an army to retake it. The political argument had reached the point of
civil war.
The first civil war
The king gathered around him the sons and retainers of the northern lords and
the court gentry, military adventurers, unemployed mercenaries, the gilded
youth of the royalist aristocracy, and a ‘Cavalier’ core of flamboyant bullies
who were to earn a reputation for the arrogant despoilation of every area of the
country through which they rode. Along with these came all those who
believed the absolute monarchies of Spain and France were the model of how
society should be run, including a significant minority of the Catholic apostles
of Counter-Reformation. The parliamentary section of the ruling class could
now only protect themselves and their property by raising armies of their own.
But events had also drawn into the conflict masses of people who were outside
the ruling class.
Merchants opposed to the royal monopoly holders had been able to gain
control of the City of London by encouraging a wave of demonstrations by
ordinary tradesmen and apprentices. But they could not simply switch the
popular movement on and off, especially when Cavalier officers attacked the
participants. Apprentices demonstrated in their hundreds and even thousands.
‘Mechanic preachers’ were blamed for encouraging people ‘to neglect their
callings and trades two or three days a week’.109 This happened as economic
hardship was causing more or less spontaneous riots in many parts of the
country over enclosures and fen drainage (which deprived the peasants of part
of their livelihood in East Anglia).
The eruption of popular anger was a double-edged weapon for the
parliamentary wing of the ruling class. It enabled them to preserve their lives
in the face of the attempted royal coup. But it also threatened them with a
movement which, if it got out of hand, could damage their own class rule.
Hardly had the urban agitation broken the hold of the king’s supporters on the
City government than the parliamentarians were trying to bring it to an end.
Many became convinced that only a new form of religious discipline, applied
by themselves, could stifle revolt among the lower classes and maintain
control. They wanted to force the king to accept their demands, but were keen
to end hostilities as quickly as possible.
This group soon formed a moderate parliamentary faction. They were
called ‘Presbyterians’ because they were associated with the notion that there
had to be a uniform system of religious doctrine, which church elders
(‘presbyters’) from their own class would impose on everyone else.
For the moment there was no avoiding war. Even the moderate
Presbyterian gentry feared the consequences of unlimited royal power and had
to mount resistance. But for the first two years of the war that resistance was
held back, like that of the Bohemian estates to the Habsburgs in 1619, by
disdain for genuinely revolutionary measures.
There was not one single parliamentary army, capable of following a
coherent national strategy, but a collection of local armies, each with a lord as
general and the local gentry as officers. The rank and file were conscripts,
often forced to fight against their will, not revolutionary enthusiasts. The
unwillingness of the gentry to provide for the upkeep of the armies led the
parliamentary troops, like the royalist Cavaliers, to live by pillaging the land,
so alienating the peasants of the countryside and the artisans of the town.
The parliamentarians enjoyed a couple of successes. The London bands of
tradesmen and artisans stopped the royal army from marching on the capital at
Turnham Green late in 1642, and the joint armies of parliament and Scotland
defeated a royalist force at Marston Moor in the summer of 1644. But most of
the battles of 1642-44 were inconclusive. Worse, by the beginning of 1645 the
situation looked potentially catastrophic. The king was still entrenched only 50
miles from London at Oxford. The parliamentary armies were tired, unpaid,
demoralised and often mutinous. There were desertions on a massive scale,
and a danger of the Scottish army doing a separate deal with the king. Unless
something was done quickly everything would be lost in an English repeat of
the Battle of the White Mountain.
There was a single bright spot in the picture. The cavalry of one of the
parliamentary armies, the ‘Ironsides’ of the ‘Eastern Association’, had been
decisive in the defeat of the royalists at Marston Moor. The cavalry had been
raised in a different way from the rest of the army. Its leader, the
Cambridgeshire landowner and MP Oliver Cromwell, had consciously chosen
not to officer it with aristocrats or man it with unwilling, impoverished
conscripts. Instead, he relied on volunteers from ‘the middling classes’: mostly
these were from the ‘yeoman’ layer of better off working farmers, who were
wealthy enough to own horses but poor enough to have a commitment—often a
Puritan, religious commitment—to hard work. They were, one observer later
wrote, ‘most of them freeholders and freeholders’ sons, who upon a matter of
conscience engaged in this quarrel’.110 Such troops, Cromwell saw, could be
as skilled as the ‘gentlemen’s sons’ and mercenaries who rode for the king, but
were more disciplined in battle since they were less likely to disperse in
pursuit of booty at the first success. He said, ‘I had rather have a plain russet-
coated captain that knows what he fights for and loves what he knows than that
which you call a “gentleman” and is nothing else’.111
Cromwell also saw that he could not attract and hold such people unless he
allowed them to give expression to values and views very different to those of
the gentry. He would not allow Presbyterian parliamentarians to purge from his
force followers of the various religious sects who carried a militant message
of salvation for the lower middle classes. Preachers with a radical message
travelled with the troops—the best known, Hugh Peter, would speak of a ‘just
social order characterised by decent care for the sick and the poor and an
improved legal system…imprisonment for debt abolished’.112 Cromwell even
defended the non-religious radical John Lilburne against his commanding
officer, the Earl of Manchester. The earl repeated gossip that Cromwell hoped
to ‘live to see never a nobleman in England’, and loved some people the better
‘because they did not love lords’.113 Cromwell may or may not have held such
views at the time. But he had built support for himself in Cambridgeshire in the
past by speaking up for farmers opposing the draining of the fens, and was
certainly prepared to play on the class feelings of the middling classes if this
was necessary to defeat the king. This meant he was prepared to show a
determination which had been lacking among so many Protestant leaders in the
struggle across continental Europe.
The New Model Army
In the spring of 1645 Cromwell was the pivotal figure in a group of MPs and
officers who saw only one way to avoid defeat—to rebuild the entire army as
a centralised force, no longer commanded by aristocrats who held back from
all out war, or officered by gentry amateurs. They only got their way in the face
of strong resistance in the House of Commons and opposition from the House
of Lords by relying on an increasingly radicalised layer of artisans and anti-
monopolist merchants in the City of London. The instrument of revolutionary
victory, the ‘New Model Army’, was formed at the moment of greatest crisis.
Many of its footsoldiers were recruited in the old way, from unwilling
conscripts who had hitherto showed no concern for the issues at stake in the
war. But the cavalry was built, as Cromwell’s Ironsides had been, of
volunteers motivated by political and religious enthusiasm. And even among
the footsoldiers there were a minority of enthusiasts who could motivate the
rest at key moments of battle. There was, in effect, a revolutionary spine to the
army, and its efforts were reinforced by inspired preaching from the likes of
Hugh Peter, the circulation of pamphlets and news-sheets, informal Bible
readings and numerous religious and political discussions.
The impact of the revolutionary approach was shown dramatically at the
Battle of Naseby in June 1645. The parliamentary army was able to hold
together after an initially successful royalist cavalry charge and then sweep
forward and rout the enemy. Within days the king’s headquarters at Oxford was
in parliamentary hands and the king had fled to surrender to the Scottish army
at Newark.
This was the decisive battle of the civil war. However, it was not the end
of the revolution.
With fear of the king removed, fear of the masses became the dominant
emotion among the great majority of the gentry. They pressed immediately for
the disbanding of the New Model Army, the curtailing of religious liberty, and
the crushing of dissident religious groups and secular revolutionaries.
But there was another force emerging which the parliamentary gentry did
not find it so easy to deal with. The rank and file of the army were not at all
happy with the prospect of being disbanded without pay or, worse, being sent
to fight a dismal war in Ireland. The ‘middling men’ of the cavalry, who had
fought for their principles, were outraged and driven to adopt a more radical
approach than hitherto. The conscripts were distressed at facing a future
without prospects and, although they could occasionally give voice to
monarchist sentiments, they were soon attracted to the talk of the minority of
committed enthusiasts among them.
The eight cavalry regiments each elected two representatives—known as
‘agitators’—to express their views. The soldiers of the other regiments
followed suit. The agitators began to make demands, in the name of the army
rank and file, that challenged not only the power of the king but also the power
of the gentry. A petition denounced the gentry in the House of Commons,
stating, ‘some that had tasted of sovereignty had turned into tyrants’.114
Regimental meetings took on an almost insurrectionary character, with attacks
on the way the Commons were elected (by a tiny franchise), demands for
annual parliaments, calls for vengeance against Presbyterian ministers, and
attacks on the arcane language of the law courts.115 The meetings of agitators
began to turn into a system of self organisation for the rank and file of the army
to press their demands—they set up a team of writers to prepare pamphlets,
they insisted the officers obtain a printing press for them, they sent delegates to
stir up the non New Model Army regiments, and they began to make contact
with ‘well affected friends’ (other radical elements) throughout the country.
Levellers and revolutionaries
A radical democratic grouping, the Levellers, led by people like Richard
Overton, John Wildman, William Walwyn and John Lilburne, enjoyed growing
influence. In October 1647 support for the Levellers reached such a peak that
Cromwell and other army leaders were compelled to chair a debate in Putney
with soldiers influenced by them. It was here that Rainborowe, the most
radical of the officers, put forward a view which challenged the whole basis
of rule by the gentry and merchant classes: ‘I think that the poorest he that is in
England has a life to live as the greatest he…the poorest man in England is not
all bound in a strict sense to that government that he hath not a voice to put
himself under’.116 In reply Cromwell’s close ally Ireton spelt out the class
view which still motivated the Independents: ‘No one has a right to…a
share…in determining of the affairs of the kingdom…that has not a permanent
fixed interest in the kingdom…that is, the person in whom all land lies, and
those in the corporations in whom all trading lies’.117
The Levellers’ position, as has often been pointed out, was not for
universal male suffrage. When pushed, they were prepared to accept that
‘servants’—those in the employ of others—should be excluded from their
scheme for increasing those allowed to vote. In part this was because they
feared that the royalist lords and gentry would dragoon their servants,
labourers and retainers to vote for them. In part it was because the core of the
radical influence in the army did not lie with the conscripted poor but with the
volunteer small property owners who saw themselves as a cut above the
labourers or journeymen working for them.
The leading Leveller, Lilburne, spelt out that the call for political rights for
small property owners did not involve an attack on the system of private
property. They were, he wrote, ‘the truest and constantest assertors of liberty
and propriety [ie property]’, and there was nothing in their writings or
declarations:
…that doth in the least tend to the destruction of liberty or propriety or to the
setting up of levelling by universal community or anything really and truly like
it…This conceit of levelling of property and magistracy is so ridiculous and
foolish an opinion that no man of brains, reason or ingenuity can be imagined
such a sort as to maintain such a principle.118
Nevertheless, the election of the agitators and the call for small property
owners to have the same rights as large was enough to terrify the already
frightened ‘moderates’ of the Presbyterian party. The power of the
representative body of the gentry and merchant classes was being challenged
by a new representative body of those members of the middling and lower
classes enrolled in the army. And these people constituted by far the most
powerful organisation of armed force in the country. A clash between a section
of the ruling class and the king risked turning into a revolutionary conflict.
The parliamentary moderates summoned three of the agitators to appear
before them and blustered about punishing them. The Presbyterian leader
Denzil Holles later said that they should have had the courage to hang one as a
warning to the others. But they let them go. They could not do more until they
had reliable armed forces of their own. They now tried to assemble these,
arranging for the City of London oligarchy to purge radicals from its militia,
establishing a ‘committee of safety’ to organise forces under the control of the
gentry in each county, attempting to ensure the military arsenals were in their
hands and negotiating with their fellow Presbyterians who controlled the
Scottish army to bring it into England. They came to believe they should unite
with the royalist gentry to restore a slightly reformed version of the old
monarchy.
The Independents around Cromwell were very weak in parliamentary
terms. But they saw they could use the agitator movement to defend themselves,
ensuring it did not get out of hand. They set up a ‘council of the army’, made up
half of rank and file representatives and half of officers. Many of the rank and
file troops still deferred to their ‘betters’, and the officers were able to direct
much of the soldiers’ bitterness into channels favourable to themselves.
At first, the aim of the Independents was to force the king to negotiate with
them. To this end they allowed a contingent of forces to seize the king from the
hands of the Presbyterian party. Cromwell and those around him intended to
make it clear that they had won the civil war and that the king had to accept the
terms they dictated, which included many of the reforms he had resisted. But
their terms still provided for a monarchy, for the continuation of the unelected
House of Lords and for the restriction of the parliamentary franchise to the
upper class.
The second civil war and the great execution
However, Charles had no intention of conceding to demands he regarded as
against the very principles of kingship. He determined on a new resort to civil
war, escaping from captivity in November 1647. Cromwell now recognised
his attempts to negotiate with the king had been mistaken and used New Model
Army troops to pressurise parliament into voting for the war party’s measures.
What is usually called ‘the second civil war’ followed in the summer of 1648.
Former supporters of parliament fought alongside the cavaliers, there were
royalist risings in south Wales, Kent and Essex, and an invasion from Scotland.
This time the victory of the anti-royalist army was not followed by a
policy of leniency or negotiation with the king. Cromwell declared, ‘They that
are inflexible and will not leave troubling the land may be speedily destroyed,’
and the officers of the New Model Army called for the death sentence on
Charles and his chief advisers. Knowing the Presbyterian majority among MPs
would never vote for this, the army occupied London. A detachment of troops
under Colonel Pride barred the leading Presbyterians from the House of
Commons, and other troops removed the leading oligarchs from their control of
the City of London. At the end of January the executioner held the severed head
of the king before a crowd in Whitehall.
The events leading to the execution were paralleled by ferment within the
New Model Army and among its civilian supporters. Cromwell and the
Independents would not have been able to take control of London and beat
back both the Presbyterians and the king without the revolutionary movement
within the army. Faced with the threat of counter-revolution, Cromwell had
been prepared for a time to defend the Levellers against Presbyterian
repression. He even went so far as to visit the imprisoned Lilburne in the
Tower of London in an attempt to reach an agreement. But he also resorted to
force as the second civil war approached. He isolated the radicals by using the
war as a pretext to reorganise their regiments, put down an attempted mutiny—
executing one of the alleged leaders, Richard Arnold—and imprison the
London Levellers. At the same time he continued to rely upon the Leveller-
influenced army rank and file in the period up to and immediately after the
execution of the king. Only then did he feel confident enough to smash those
who articulated class feelings. Cromwell berated his fellows on the Council of
State: ‘I tell you, sir, you have no other way to deal with these men but to break
them or they will break you’.119 In the spring of 1649 the Leveller leaders in
London were confined to the Tower and, in May, a mutiny of 1,000 troops was
broken and four of its leaders were executed in the churchyard at Burford in
Oxfordshire.
The bulk of the New Model Army was no longer needed to defeat the king
and the Presbyterians in England. It was dispatched, minus its agitators, to
Ireland, while a Leveller pamphlet asked the soldiers:
Will you go on still to kill, slay and murder men, to make [your officers]
absolute lords and masters over Ireland, as you have made them over England?
Or is it your ambition to reduce the Irish to the happiness of tithes…to excise,
customs and monopolies in trades? Or to fill their prisons with poor disabled
prisoners, to fill their land with swarms of beggars?120
This was a prophetic warning of what the English ruling class was to do to
Ireland. But it could hardly stop impoverished men accepting military
discipline and the only livelihood open to them once their leaders had been
shot.
The Levellers were not a movement based on the impoverished mass of
society, but on the ‘middling sort’—the artisans, the lesser traders, the better-
off farmers and the soldiers who were recruited from these groups. They were
the most radical and courageous party to emerge from these groups and pushed
a programme which, had it been successful, would have brought about a much
greater revolutionary change than actually occurred. They did so from the point
of view of social groups which hoped to prosper from the growth of capitalist
forms of production—the groups which were to crystallise over the next
century into an increasingly self conscious ‘middle class’. But in doing so they
began to challenge the tradition that a section of society was divinely entitled
to rule over the rest. Like Müntzer and his followers in the German Peasant
War, they helped to establish a rival tradition of resistance to class rule.
The defeat of the Levellers did not mean nothing had been achieved by the
agitation and fighting of the previous years. The group around Cromwell had
only been able to win by taking revolutionary measures, even if limited in
scope. From 1649 the government of England—and soon of Scotland as well
—was run by army officers, many of whom came from the ‘middling sort’.
Christopher Hill has noted that after the second civil war:
The men who were taking control of events now, though not Levellers, were…
of a significantly lower social class [than before]…Colonel Ewer, a former
serving man, Colonel Thomas Harrison…the son of a grazier or butcher…
Pride…had been a drayman or brewer’s employee…Colonel Okey a tallow
chandler, Hewson a shoe maker, Goffe a salter, Barkstead a goldsmith or
thimble maker, Berry a clerk to an iron works, Kelesy a button maker…The
men who came to power in December 1648 and who were responsible for the
execution of Charles I were men well below the rank of the traditional rulers
of England.121
Such men pushed through a series of measures which broke the hold of
those who would have turned English society back in a feudal direction once
and for all. In this way the English Revolution cleared the ground for the
development of a society based on market relations and capitalist forms of
exploitation.
Cromwell himself did not come from a new ‘bourgeois’ exploiting class,
although he had family connections with some of the merchants. But he could
not have succeeded without relying on those out of whom such a class was
forming. His genius lay in his ability to grasp the fact that the crisis of English
society could not be resolved without turning to new methods and new men.
This alone could stop the English Revolution suffering the same fate as the
French Calvinists or the Bohemian estates. A member of a gentry family had to
carry through a revolution which ensured society would be run on essentially
bourgeois lines.
He ruled England virtually as a dictator for a decade. His regime was
based on military force. But it could not survive indefinitely without wider
social backing. Cromwell recognised this and attempted to establish
parliaments which would back him, only to discover that the dissensions which
had turned Presbyterians against Independents in the mid-1640s continually re-
emerged. The gentry in each locality wanted an end to the uncertainty
associated with revolutionary upheaval and balked at further reform. Sections
of the ‘middling sort’ wanted more radical reform, and were well represented
among the army officers. But they were not prepared to push such reform
through if it meant further social unrest and as the decade passed they
increasingly allied themselves with the very sections of the gentry they had
fought during the civil war—people who still saw a monarchy as the
precondition for maintaining social order. The culmination of this process
came in 1660 after Cromwell’s death. A section of the army agreed with the
remnants of parliament to invite the son of the executed king back as monarch.
Although the revolution was over, many of the changes survived. The
monarchy’s existence now depended on the will of the propertied classes
expressed through parliament—as was shown in 1688 when they threw James
II out in a ‘bloodless’ revolution. The wealth of the propertied classes
depended as never before on their success in coping with market forces. The
large landowners increasingly embraced capitalist methods of agriculture. The
growing portion of the population who lived in towns increasingly either
employed others or worked for others. Guilds were no longer able to prevent
innovation in productive techniques—by 1689 three quarters of English towns
contained no guilds at all.122 Government policies were dictated by the desire
to expand trade, not by the dynastic intrigues of the monarch.
Together these changes represented something radically new in world
history. The means by which people earned a living was now carried out in
units which depended for survival upon the ability of those who ran them to
keep costs below those of other units. The big farmer, the medium sized iron
master, even the individual handloom weaver, could only guarantee they
earned a living if they could stay in business, and that meant keeping up with
new methods of production which cut costs.
Competition for the sake of competition, rather than the immediate
consumption needs of the rich or poor, increasingly became the driving force
of economic activity. The growth which followed was often chaotic, marked
by sudden ups and downs. It was also of little benefit to a growing section of
the population whose survival increasingly depended on their ability to sell
their labour power to others. But it transformed the situation of the English
economy and those who dominated it. What had been one of the poorer parts of
Europe rapidly became the most advanced, providing its rulers with the means
to build a world empire—and, in the process, helped the new capitalist form
of production to begin to displace all previous forms.
Chapter 4
The last flowering of Asia’s empires
Looking back today we can see that what happened in Europe in the 16th and
17th centuries was to transform the world. It would enable a few European
powers to carve out empires which encompassed virtually the whole of Asia
and Africa, and lead the whole world to be drawn into a new way of
organising production, industrial capitalism.
But history had not come to a standstill for the five sixths of humanity who
lived elsewhere. The empires of Mexico and Peru may have fallen almost
overnight to the European colonists. But this was not true even of the rest of the
Americas. In the north, only a narrow eastern seaboard was colonised by the
end of the 17th century. As for Africa and Asia, European colonies in these
continents were little more than trading posts at the time of the Thirty Years
War and remained so long after. Dutch settlers did succeed in conquering the
Khoisan hunter-gathering peoples (the so called ‘Hottentots’ and ‘Bushmen’) of
the southernmost tip of Africa. But it was almost 200 years before Europeans
could begin to move north by defeating agriculturists whose knowledge of
steelmaking provided them with effective weaponry. The Portuguese seized
Goa, a coastal enclave on the south west coast of India, in the 16th century,
establishing a city123 which was impressive by the European standards of the
time, and ran a trading town on the island of Macao, off the coast of southern
China. But their efforts seemed puny in comparison with the great kingdoms
and empires close by. The first Portuguese visitors to the capital of one of the
four kingdoms of southern India, Vijayanagar,124 wrote in 1522 that it was as
big as Rome, with 100,000 houses, and was ‘the best provided city in the
world’ as regarded the organisation of its food supplies.125 Certainly, the
remains of the city cover a much wider area than almost any early 16th century
European city. Further north, the Mogul emperors who began conquering the
subcontinent in 1525 built or rebuilt a series of cities—Lahore, Delhi, Agra—
on a scale unmatched in Europe. The rulers of the Chinese Empire could
virtually ignore the Europeans on the southern coast. The only threat to their
great cities came from the pastoralist peoples to the north. Meanwhile,
Ottoman Turkey was the great rising power on western Europe’s doorstep.
After conquering Constantinople in 1453, it went on to take Cairo in 1517,
Algiers in 1528 and Hungary in 1526, besieging Vienna in 1529 and again in
1683. The Ottoman Empire was a continual player in the diplomatic games and
military coalitions of Reformation Europe, its culture much admired in the
literature of the time. Between the Ottoman Empire and the Mogul Empire in
India stood the Iranian Safavid Empire, centred on the new capital of Isfahan
which amazed European visitors with its splendour. And off the coast of east
Asia, the islands of Japan had borrowed enormously from Chinese culture and
technique to establish a relatively developed civilisation which shared certain
of the features of European feudalism, complete with wars between
aristocratic lords using steel and gunpowder to try to establish hegemony over
one another.126 Even in Europe, a great power emerged outside the area swept
by the Renaissance, the Reformation and religious wars. In the east, a
succession of rulers began to transform the old duchy of Muscovy into a
centralised Russian state and then an empire which spread over the whole of
northern Asia and encroached on Poland to the west.
These empires were not characterised by the economic backwardness in
comparison with Europe which was their feature by the late 19th century. Some
of the technical advances which had propelled Europe from the old feudalism
of the 10th century to the very different societies of the 16th century could be
found in all of them. They all used firearms of some sort—the first Mogul
emperor, Babur, defeated much bigger armies in northern India in 1526 by
using artillery to complement his highly competent cavalry. These societies
borrowed building techniques and craft skills from one another so that, for
instance, craftsmen from across Asia and Europe worked on the construction of
the Taj Mahal tomb built by the Mogul emperor Shah Jahan. In all of them
agriculture and diet began to change considerably with the spread of new
domesticated plants from the Americas—the cultivation of chillies, sweet
peppers, tomatoes, tobacco and maize in India, and of sweet potatoes, ground
nuts, maize and tobacco in China.
China’s glorious sunset
China was already recovering from its crisis of the 14th century by the early
part of the 15th. One proof was a series of epic voyages by naval expeditions.
Fleets of large ships carrying more than 20,000 people sailed to the west coast
of India, Aden and on to east Africa, on one occasion making the 6,000 mile
journey non-stop. This was three quarters of a century before Spanish or
Portuguese fleets attempted comparable journeys.
Gernet calls the 16th century ‘the beginning of a new age’.127 In
agriculture, he notes, there were new machines for working the soil, for
irrigation, sowing seed and the treatment of products along with new methods
of improving the soil and the selection of new crop strains. In industry, there
was the introduction of the silk loom with three or four shuttle-winders, along
with improvements in cotton looms, the development of printing from wood
blocks in three or four colours and the invention of a copper-lead alloy for
casting moveable character, and new ways of manufacturing white and icing
sugars.128 ‘Numerous works of a scientific or technical character were
published’ in the first part of the 17th century, dealing with questions as
diverse as agricultural techniques, weaving, ceramics, iron and steel, river
transport, armaments, inks and papers, and hydraulic devices.129 This was
certainly not a period of technological stagnation. Nor was it one in which
intellectuals simply parroted certainties from the past. Gernet tells of thinkers
such as the self educated former salt worker Wang Ken, who questioned the
established view of historical figures, challenged the hypocrisies of the age
and traditional morality, and defended ‘lower classes, women, ethnic
minorities’.130 Gernet continues:
The end of the 16th century and the first half of the 17th century were marked
by the remarkable development of the theatre, the short story and the novel, and
by the upsurge of a semi-learned, semi-popular culture…of an urban middle
class eager for reading matter and entertainment. Never had the book industry
been so prosperous or its products of such good quality.131
There was a ‘rapid increase in the number of cheap publications’, with
literature ‘written in a language much closer to the spoken dialects than to
classical Chinese…addressed to an urban public…not well educated, but free
of the intellectual constraints indicated by a classical training’.132 If Gernet’s
account is correct, then China was undergoing a technical and intellectual
renaissance at more or less the same time as Europe.133
There were some similar social changes. The state increasingly commuted
the old labour services of peasants and artisans into money taxes. The
commercialisation of agriculture led to the production of industrial crops like
cotton, dyes, vegetable oils and tobacco. Poorer peasants, driven from the land
by landlords, sought a livelihood in other ways—taking up handicraft trades,
emigrating to the mining areas, seeking work in the towns. Trading and craft
enterprises flourished, especially in the coastal regions of the south and east.
As in Europe, most production was still in artisan workshops. But there were
occasional examples of something close to full-scale industrial capitalism.
Small enterprises grew into big enterprises, some of which employed several
hundred workers. Peasant women took jobs at Sung-chiang, south west of
Shanghai, in the cotton mills.134 At the end of the 16th century there were
50,000 workers in 30 paper factories in Kiangsi.135 Some Chinese industries
began producing for a worldwide, rather than a merely local, market. Silk and
ceramics were exported in bulk to Japan.136 It was not long before ‘Chinese
silks were being worn in the streets of Kyoto and Lima, Chinese cottons being
sold in Filipino and Mexican markets and Chinese porcelain being used in
fashionable homes from Sakai to London’.137
It was a period of economic growth despite continued poverty among the
lower classes. After falling by almost half to around 70 million in the 14th
century, the population rose to an estimated 130 million in the late 16th century
and to as high as 170 million by the 1650s.138 Then the empire ran into a
devastating crisis similar in many ways to those of the 4th century and the 14th
century—as well as to that occurring simultaneously in much of 17th century
Europe. There were a succession of epidemics, floods, droughts and other
disasters. Famines devastated whole regions. The population stopped growing
and even declined in some regions.139 Once-flourishing industries shut down.
By the 1640s reports from northern Chekiang (the hinterland of Shanghai)
spoke of ‘mass starvation, hordes of beggars, infanticide and cannibalism’.140
By 1642 the great city of Soochow [on the lower Yangtze] was in visible
decline, with many homes vacant and falling into ruin, while the once-rich
countryside had become a no man’s land which only armed men dared enter.141
Historians often explain this crisis, like the earlier ones, in terms of
overpopulation or harvest failures due to global changes in climate.142 But
‘rice was available in the Yangtze delta even during the terrible “famines” that
plagued the country during the early 1640s…People simply lacked sufficient
funds to pay for it’.143
The crises were, in fact, rooted in the organisation of Chinese society. The
state and the bureaucratic class which staffed it had encouraged economic
expansion in the aftermath of the crisis of the 14th century. But they soon began
to fear some of the side-effects, particularly the growing influence of
merchants. There was a sudden end to the great naval voyages to India and
Africa in 1433 (so ensuring it was ships from Europe which ‘discovered’
China, rather than the other way round).144 ‘The major concern of the Ming
empire was not to allow coastal trade to disturb the social life of its agrarian
society’.145 Its rulers could not stop all overseas trade. What today would be
called a ‘black economy’ grew up in coastal regions, and there were bitter
armed clashes with ‘pirates’ controlling such areas. But the state measures
cramped the development of the new forms of production.
Meanwhile, the ever-growing unproductive expenditure of the state was an
enormous drain on the economy. Under emperor Wanli, for instance, there were
45 princes of the first rank, each receiving incomes equal to 600 tons of grain a
year, and 23,000 nobles of lesser rank. More than half the tax revenues of the
provinces of Shansi and Honan went on paying these allowances. A war with
Japan for control of Korea ‘completely exhausted the treasury’.146
Acute hardship led to social discontent. Almost every year between 1596
and 1626 saw urban riots by ‘workmen’ in the most economically developed
parts of the country.147 In 1603 the miners from private mines marched on
Beijing, the 1620s saw rebellions by the non-Chinese peoples in the south
west, and there were major peasant rebellions in the north of the country in the
1630s. A sort of opposition also emerged at the top of society among
intellectuals and former mandarins which was crushed by a secret police
network.148
Political collapse followed in 1644. The last Ming emperor strangled
himself as a former shepherd leader of a peasant army proclaimed a new
dynasty. A month later Manchu invaders from the north took Beijing.
The economic and political crisis bore many similarities to that in Europe
in the same period. But there was a difference. The merchant and artisan
classes did not begin to pose an alternative of their own to the old order. They
did not even do what the Calvinist merchants and burghers in France did when
they exerted some influence on the dissident wing of the aristocracy. They
certainly did not remould the whole of society in their own image, as the
merchant bourgeoisie of the northern Netherlands and the ‘middling classes’ in
England did. As in the previous great crises in Chinese society, the trading and
artisan classes were too dependent on the state bureaucracy to provide an
alternative.
The immediate chaos lasted only a few years. The Manchus had long
before absorbed many aspects of Chinese civilisation, and by restoring internal
peace and stability to the imperial finances they provided a framework for
economic recovery—for a period. There was further agricultural advance as
crops from the Americas made their full impact and industrial crops expanded.
The peasant was ‘in general much better and happier than his equivalent in the
France of Louis XV’, with the better-off peasants even able to pay for their
children to receive a formal education.149 There was a resumption of trade and
craft production until it outstripped anything before. There were 200,000 full
time textile workers in the region south west of Shanghai, and tens of thousands
of porcelain craftsmen turned out products for the court and for export to as far
away as Europe. Tea output grew rapidly, with the leaves processed in
workshops employing hundreds of wage workers and exported by sea. One
estimate suggests half the silver carried from Latin America to Europe between
1571 and 1821 ended up paying for goods from China. The population grew by
leaps and bounds as people saw hope for the future, perhaps reaching 260
million in 1812.150 The country was ‘the richest and biggest state in the
world’.151
The sheer strength of the empire bred complacency in its ruling circles,
and complacency led to intellectual stagnation. The early Manchu years saw a
flourishing of intellectual inquiry, a wave of ‘free thought and a radical
criticism and questioning of the institutions and intellectual foundations of the
authoritarian empire’.152 Art, literature, philosophy and history all seem to
have been marked by a spirit of vitality. Accounts of the period remind one of
the ‘Enlightenment’ in Europe.153 But the critical spirit subsided as the
‘educated classes rallied to the new regime’.154 There was a decline in
popular literature for the urban middle classes,155 and a ban on anything that
might be construed as mildly critical of the regime. In the years 1774-89 more
than 10,000 works were prohibited and 2,320 destroyed. Dissident authors and
their relatives faced exile, forced labour, confiscation of property and even
execution.156 Intellectuals could flourish, but only if they avoided dealing with
real issues. The literature which thrived was ‘written in a classical style more
difficult to access, full of literary reminiscences and allusions…The novel
became subtly ironical, psychological…or erudite’.157
The basic causes of the crisis of the 17th century were never dealt with,
and the old symptoms soon reappeared—immense expenditures on the imperial
court, the spread of corruption through the administration, costly wars on the
borders, increased oppression of the peasants by local administrators and tax
collectors, a failure to maintain the dykes and regulate water courses, and
recurrent and sometimes catastrophic floods.158 A new wave of peasant
rebellions began with the rising of the ‘White Lotus’ in 1795, and one of the
greatest revolts in Chinese history was to follow within half a century.
Mogul India
Mogul India was a very different society to China. It did not have the great
canal and irrigation systems,159 a centralised bureaucracy inculcated with
literary traditions almost 2,000 years old, a class of large landowners, or a
peasantry that bought as well as sold things in local markets.
A succession of Islamic rulers had overrun much of northern India from the
13th century, imposing centralised structures on the local peasant economies of
the Indian Middle Ages. The Mogul emperors developed the system, ruling
through a hierarchy of officials who were given the right to collect land taxes
in specific areas with which they had to maintain the cavalry essential for the
military functioning of the state. They were not landowners, although they grew
rich from the exploitation of the peasantry. There was also another landed
class—the zamindars—in each locality. They were often upper caste Hindus
from the pre-Mogul exploiting classes, who helped to collect the taxes and
took a share for themselves.160
The great mass of rural people continued to live in virtually self sufficient
villages. Hereditary groups of peasants would produce food for hereditary
groups of village smiths, carpenters, weavers and barbers in a self contained
division of labour that did not involve cash payments. All the elements of the
medieval caste system remained intact.
But the peasants did need cash for their taxes, and had to sell between a
third and a half of their crops to get it. Those who failed to pay, as one
observer recorded in the 1620s, were ‘carried off, attached to heavy chains, to
various markets and fairs’ to be sold as slaves, ‘with their poor, unhappy
wives behind them carrying their small children in their arms, all crying and
lamenting their plight’.161
The great bulk of the surplus extracted from the peasants in this way went
to the imperial court, the state bureaucracy and its armies. As Irfan Habib
explains, the state ‘served not merely as the protective arm of the exploiting
class, but was itself the principle instrument of exploitation’.162 Few of these
revenues ever returned to the villages. The state used them in the cities and
towns of the empire.
The result was a growth of trade and urban craft production, and a system
that was far from economically static. The Mogul period witnessed ‘the
achievement of an unprecedented level of industrial and commercial
prosperity, reflected in general urbanisational growth’.163There was an
‘intensification, expansion and multiplication of crafts’, and of both internal
and international trade. ‘There were as many as 120 big cities’,164 and ‘great
concentrations of population, production and consumption [in] Lahore, Delhi
and Agra, and to a lesser extent in Lucknow, Benares and Allahabad’.165
Contemporary observers regarded Lahore ‘as the greatest city in the east’.166
One European visitor estimated the population of Agra to be 650,000,167 and
Delhi was said to be as big as Europe’s biggest city, Paris.168
The biggest industry, cotton textiles, was exporting products to Europe by
the 17th century: ‘As many as 32 urban centres manufactured cotton in large
quantities’169 ‘no city, town or village seems to have been devoid of these
industries’170 and ‘almost every house in the villages used to have its spinning
wheel’.171 At the same time, ‘The organisation of commercial credit, insurance
and rudimentary deposit banking reminds us of conditions in Renaissance
Europe’.172
But one factor was missing to make this economic advance lasting—there
was no feedback into the villages of the industrial advance in the towns. ‘So
much is wrung from the peasants’, wrote one contemporary witness, ‘that even
dry bread is scarcely left to fill their stomachs’.173 They simply could not
afford to buy improved tools. ‘There is no evidence that the villages depended
in any way on urban industry’,174 and so the growth of the city trades was
accompanied by stagnation and impoverishment of the villages. In general, the
city ‘was not a city that produced commodities for the use of society, rather
one that devastated the countryside while eating up local produce’.175
The long term effect was to ruin the peasant productive base of the
empire.176 At the same time as Shah Jahan was using the tax revenues to glorify
Lahore, Delhi and Agra and build the Taj Mahal, an observer reported that ‘the
land was being laid waste through bribery and revenue farming, as a result of
which the peasantry was being robbed and plundered’.177 Peasants began to
flee from the land. Habib tells how, ‘famines initiated wholesale movements of
population…but it was a man-made system which, more than any other factor,
lay at the root of the peasant mobility’.178
The cities grew partly because landless labourers flooded into them
looking for employment. But this could not cure the debilitating effect of over-
taxation on the countryside. Just as the empire seemed at its most magnificent it
entered into a decline that was to prove terminal.
The effects became apparent during the reign of Shah Jahan’s son (and
jailer) Aurangzeb.179 Many histories of the Moguls contrast Aurangzeb’s
Islamic fanaticism, anti-Hindu actions and endless wars with the apparently
enlightened rule of Akbar a century earlier, based as it was on religious
tolerance and controls on the rapaciousness of local officials. No doubt these
differences owed something to the personalities of the two emperors. But they
also corresponded to two periods—one in which the empire could still expand
without damaging its agrarian base and one in which that was no longer
possible.
Eventually urban industry and the towns began to suffer from the
agricultural decline—except, perhaps, in Bengal. In Agra after 1712 there was
‘talk only of the present deserted state of the city and the glory that existed
before’.180
At first, few peasants dared challenge Mogul power. ‘The people endure
patiently, professing that they would not desire anything better’, a European
traveller reported in the 1620s.181 Discontent at this time found expression in
the rise of new religious sects. They used vernacular dialects rather than the
dead language Sanskrit, and their prophets and preachers came mainly from the
lower classes—including a weaver, a cotton carder, a slave, and the grain
merchant Guru Nanak, founder of Sikhism.182 The sects challenged the
traditional Brahman-based religious ideology and stood for ‘an
uncompromising monotheism, the abandonment of ritualistic forms of worship,
the denial of caste barriers and communal differences’.183 But they also shied
away from the language of outright rebellion. They taught ‘humility and
resignation’, not ‘militancy or physical struggle’.184
This changed as the conditions of their followers worsened: ‘The sects
could not always remain within the old mystic shell…They provided the
inspiration for two of the most powerful revolts against the Moguls, those of
the Satnams and the Sikhs’.185 By the end of Aurangzeb’s reign, ‘half-crushed
Sikh insurgents’ were already a problem in the hinterland of Lahore.186 There
was a revolt of the Jat peasant caste in the region between Agra and Delhi (one
writer boasted that the suppression of a revolt involved the slaughter ‘of
10,000 of those human-looking beasts’),187 a great Sikh rebellion in 1709,188
and a revolt of the Marathas, ‘which was the greatest single force responsible
for the downfall of the empire’.189
The fighting strength of the rebellions was provided by peasant bitterness.
But the leadership usually came from zamindar or other local exploiting
classes who resented the lion’s share of the surplus going to the Mogul ruling
class. ‘Risings of the oppressed’ merged with ‘the war between two
oppressing classes’.190
The merchants and artisans did not play a central role in the revolts. They
relied on the luxury markets of the Mogul rulers and lacked the network of
local markets which allowed the urban classes in parts of Europe to influence
the peasantry. The old society was in crisis, but the ‘bourgeoisie’ was not
ready to play an independent role in fighting to transform it.191 This left
zamindar leaders with a free hand to exploit the revolt for their own ends—
ones which could not carry society forward.
As Irfan Habib concludes:
Thus was the Mogul Empire destroyed. No new order was, or could be,
created from the force ranged against it…The gates were open to endless
rapine, anarchy and foreign conquest. But the Mogul Empire had been its own
gravedigger.192
The way was open for armies from western Europe to begin empire-
building of their own, and to have the backing of sectors of the Indian merchant
bourgeoisie when they did so.
Part five
The spread of the new order
Chronology
18th century
Chinese agriculture and industry recover for half a century.
Revolts by Sikhs and Marathas lead to break up of Mogul Empire in India.
Economic stagnation in much of eastern and southern Europe.
Peter the Great begins building of St Petersburg 1703, tries to introduce west
European science and techniques to Russia.
Unification of England and Scotland 1707.
Defeat of attempted Stuart Restorations 1716. Agricultural revolution in
Britain, spread of enclosures to almost all land.
British economy overtakes France and then Holland.
Voltaire publishes first philosophical work 1734, praises English system. Bach
develops counterpoint and fugue form in music.
Battle of Culloden, defeat of final attempt at Stuart Restoration in Britain,
bloody destruction of remnants of Highland feudalism 1746.
Diderot begins publication of Encyclopédie to popularise ‘Enlightened’ ideas
1751.
British East India Company takes control of Bengal 1757.
Rousseau publishes Discourse on the Origins of Inequality 1755 and The
Social Contract 1762.
Voltaire publishes satirical novel Candide 1759 pouring scorn on optimism.
Banning of Encyclopédie 1759.
Execution of two Protestants in France 1761 and 1766.
‘Enlightened despotism’—monarchs in Prussia, Russia, Portugal and Austria
try unsuccessfully to reform rule.
Growth of Glasgow as a major commercial and industrial city.
‘Scottish Enlightenment’ of David Hume, Adam Ferguson and Adam Smith.
Britain defeats France in war over control of new colonial lands 1763.
Height of slave trade, growth of Bristol, Liverpool, Bordeaux, Nantes.
Slave population of North America 400,000 (out of three million) 1770.
Arkwright founds first spinning factory at Cromford in Derbyshire 1771.
Attempts at ‘scientific’ justification for racism—Long’s History of Jamaica
1774.
Watt and Boulton build first generally applicable steam engines 1775.
Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations preaches order based on ‘free labour’
and ‘free trade’ 1776.
Revolt of North American colonies against British rule, Tom Paine’s Common
Sense popularises
Enlightenment ideas for mass audience.
Declaration of Independence declares ‘all men are created equal’ (but is silent
over question of slavery) 1776.
Henry Cort devises more advanced way of smelting iron using coal 1783.
Beginnings of industrial revolution in Britain—40 percent of people no longer
living on the land.
Mozart’s symphonies and operas, The Marriage of Figaro 1786, Don
Giovanni 1787.
Chapter 1
A time of social peace
The century and a quarter after 1650 was very different in most of Europe from
the century and a quarter before. Religious wars, peasant uprisings, civil wars
and revolutions seemed a thing of the past.
There were bitter wars between European powers, such as the War of the
Spanish Succession at the beginning of the 18th century and the Seven Years
War in its middle. There were also struggles at the top of society over the exact
division of power between kings and aristocrats in countries such as Denmark,
Sweden, Poland and Portugal. There were even attempts by supporters of the
Stuart dynasty in 1690, 1715 and 1745 to upset by military means the
constitutional order established in Britain. But the passions which had shaken
so much of Europe through the previous period now survived only on its
fringes. It would have been easy for anyone contemplating the world in the
mid-1750s to conclude that the age of revolution had long since passed,
despite the absurdities and barbarisms of the times so brilliantly portrayed in
Voltaire’s satirical novel Candide.
Yet the central features of the period were a product of the preceding
revolutionary upheavals. That one-time bastion of counter-revolution, the
Habsburg dynasty, was a shadow of its former self, losing the crown of Spain
to a branch of the Bourbons. By contrast, the two states in which the
revolutionary forces had broken through, the Dutch republic and England, were
increasingly important—Holland taking over much of the old Portuguese
colonial empire and England then challenging this.
The second half of the 17th century is sometimes called the ‘Dutch Golden
Age’. Agriculture flourished with land reclamation from the sea and the
adoption of new plant types and farming methods.1 Industry reached an ‘apex
of prosperity’ when ‘the Zaanstreek, a flat watery district just north of
Amsterdam,’ emerged as probably ‘the most modern industrial zone…in all
Europe’, with 128 industrial windmills permitting ‘the mechanisation of many
industries from papermaking to rice husking’.2
England began to undergo an ‘agricultural revolution’ in the aftermath of
the civil war. Farming was increasingly commercialised and new crops were
widely introduced—from turnips and potatoes to maize. There was a spread of
capitalist farming and a great wave of ‘enclosures’—the fencing off of old
common grazing land by landlords and capitalist farmers, forcing the mass of
poor peasants to become wage labourers.
Industrial output also grew—by an estimated 0.7 percent a year from 1710
to 1760, 1.3 percent a year between 1760 and 1780, and 2 percent from 1780
to 1800. The proportion of town dwellers grew from about 9 percent in 1650
to 20 percent in 1800.3 Initially there was widespread opposition in Scotland
to the 1707 unification with England, but it resulted in a substantial and
sustained growth of industry and trade. On visiting Glasgow 15 years later
Daniel Defoe could describe it as ‘a city of business; here is a city of foreign
and home trade…that encreases and improves in both’.4
Industrial innovation began to gain a momentum of its own in the now
united kingdom, laying the ground for the industrial revolution in the last
quarter of the 18th century. The first working steam engine was developed in
1705 (although it was another 60 years before James Watt made it efficient
enough to work anywhere but in mines). Iron was smelted using coke rather
than charcoal in 1709 (although it was to be 40 years before it was of
sufficiently high quality for general use). In the decades from the 1730s to the
1760s, successive inventors managed to break down the task of spinning into
component parts and begin to mechanise them, with Hargreaves’s spinning
jenny (1766), Arkwright’s water frame (1769), and Compton’s mule (1779).5
Along with such great changes there were lesser, piecemeal changes in many of
the older, mainly handcraft based industries: the spread of the stocking frame,
the weaving of less costly ‘new drapery’ cloths, the introduction of the flying
shuttle which doubled the productivity of the handloom weaver, deeper coal
mines using more sophisticated equipment (coal output grew from 500,000
tons in 1650 to five million tons in 1750 and 15 million in 1800).6
In the new climate of intensive competition for foreign trade, technical
innovation was no longer a haphazard, accidental occurrence which took
decades or even centuries to find acceptance, but a requirement for success.
Holland and Britain were not modern industrial societies. The majority of
the population still lived in the countryside and the poor quality of roads meant
it still took many days of uncomfortable travelling to journey from provincial
towns to capital cities. They were nothing like modern democracies either.
British governments were dominated by the great landowning aristocrats, who
were usually able to decide how the lesser gentry and burghers who elected
the House of Commons would vote, while the great merchants held similar
sway in Holland.
Nevertheless, both countries were qualitatively different from what they
had been a century, let alone two centuries, before—and qualitatively different
from their European neighbours. The legal subjection of the peasantry to
individual lords had gone completely. There were genuine national markets,
without the hodgepodge of petty states which characterised Germany and Italy
or the internal customs barriers that criss-crossed France. A very large number
of people had some experience of urban life—fully one sixth of England’s
population had spent at least some time in London by the end of the 17th
century. Rural industries absorbed the labour of many people even in
agricultural districts, and the sea ports and navies employed large numbers of
the lower classes in occupations dependent upon trade rather than agriculture.
London overtook Paris as the largest city in Europe, and although most
production was still carried on by individual craft workers in their own homes
or workshops, their work was increasingly coordinated by merchants or other
wealthier artisans. There were ‘clothier’ entrepreneurs in the west of England
employing 100, 400 or even 1,000 weavers and finishers, and with incomes
greater than many of the gentry.7
The great families who dominated governments were careful to adopt
policies which kept the ‘middling’ traders, manufacturers and capitalist
farmers happy as well as the large merchants. In the 1760s and early 1770s the
burghers of the City of London agitated furiously against the aristocratic and
gentry interests which controlled parliament and government, and their
spokesman, John Wilkes, spent time in prison—but they had the backing of
some of the great families and eventually managed to impose their will on the
others without a need for revolutionary measures. The great ideological and
political struggles of the 16th and early 17th centuries meant they had already
won the most important battles.
Things were very different in the European countries where the
revolutionary upsurges had been thwarted. For most of these the 17th century
was a period of economic decline—of falling population as deaths exceeded
births, of a contraction of the urban crafts, of low investment in agriculture as
lords and the state between them took all the surplus and the peasantry
wallowed in endless poverty (and in places suffered the ‘second serfdom’).
Total agricultural output was probably lower in 18th century Poland, Sicily or
Castile than it had been two centuries earlier. In Bohemia one person in ten
died of hunger in the famine of 1770-72: such was the price of counter-
revolutionary victory.
France, south western Germany and northern Italy were ‘intermediate’.
They did not suffer the economic regression which characterised Castile, the
Italian south and eastern Europe. But their agriculture and industry were more
backward, on average, than England’s and Holland’s. Innovative farming
techniques and capitalist relations spread in some regions close to large towns.
There was some increase in handicraft production and even, in a few cases, the
establishment of larger mining or industrial enterprises. Some ports oriented
on Atlantic trade expanded considerably, especially on the west coast of
France. By the 1780s, 20 percent of the French population were employed in
mainly small-scale industry—as against 40 percent in England. Major parts of
Europe were moving in the same direction on the road to industrial capitalism,
but at very different speeds.
Chapter 2
From superstition to science
The contrasting economic fortunes of the different parts of Europe were
matched by a contrast in intellectual endeavour.
The Renaissance and Reformation had broken upon a world penetrated at
every level by superstitious beliefs—beliefs in religious relics and priestly
incantations, beliefs in the magic potions and talismans provided by ‘cunning
men’, beliefs in diabolical possession and godly exorcism, beliefs in the
ability of ‘witches’ to cast deadly spells and of the touch of kings to cure
illnesses.8 Such beliefs were not only to be found among the illiterate masses.
They were as prevalent among rulers as among peasants. Kings would collect
holy relics. Men as diverse as Christopher Columbus, Oliver Cromwell and
Isaac Newton took prophecies based on the biblical Book of Revelation
seriously. A Cortés or a Pizarro might ascribe victory in battle to divine
intervention, and a king (James VI of Scotland, soon to be James I of England)
could write a treatise on witchcraft.
Such beliefs went alongside ignorance of the real causes of the ills that
afflicted people. Life for most was short. Sudden death was common and all
too often inexplicable given the level of knowledge. The ignorance of doctors
was such that their remedies were as likely to make an illness worse as to cure
it. An epidemic of plague or smallpox could wipe out a quarter or more of a
town’s population. Devastating harvest failures—and sudden hunger—could
be expected by most people once or more a decade. A single fire could burn
down a whole street or, as in London in 1666, a whole city.
The only long term solution to any of these problems lay in beginning to
understand the natural causes behind apparently unnatural events. But science
was still not something fully separate from superstition. Knowledge of how to
separate and fuse natural substances (chemistry) was mixed in with belief in
the transmutation of base metals into gold (alchemy). Knowledge of the
motions of the planets and the stars (astronomy)—essential for working out
dates and charting ocean voyages—was still tied to systems of belief which
purported to predict events (astrology). A serious interest in mathematics could
still be combined with faith in the magic of numerical sequences. And it was
possible to reject most of these confusions but still believe scientific
knowledge could be gained simply from the study of old Greek, Latin or
Arabic texts.
There was a vicious circle. Magical beliefs could not be dispelled without
the advance of science. But science was cramped by systems of magical
beliefs. What is more, the difference between a set of scientific beliefs and a
set of unscientific beliefs was not as obvious as it might seem today.
Take the belief that the planets, the sun and the stars moved around the
Earth. This was based on the views of Aristotle, as amended after his death by
Ptolemy.9 There had long existed a different view, holding that the Earth moved
round the sun. It had been developed in the ancient Graeco-Roman world by
Heracliedes of Pontus and in the medieval period by Nicole Oresme and
Nicolas Cusanus. But hard as it may be to understand today, the most learned
and scientifically open minds rejected the view that ‘the Earth moves’ for a
millennium and a half, since it contradicted other, unchallenged Aristotelian
principles about the motion of objects. The new account of the Earth and
planets moving round the sun presented by the Polish monk Copernicus in 1543
could not deal with this objection. It was far from winning universal
acceptance, even among those who recognised its utility for certain practical
purposes. For instance, Francis Bacon—whose stress on the need for
empirical observation is credited with doing much to free science from
superstition—rejected the Copernican system since ‘a teacher of the modern
empirical approach does not see the need for such subversive imaginings’.10
Scepticism was reinforced by inaccuracies discovered in Copernicus’s
calculations of the movements of the planets. It was half a century before this
problem was solved mathematically by Kepler, who showed the calculations
worked perfectly if the planets were seen as moving in elliptical rather than
circular orbits. But Kepler’s own beliefs were magical by our standards. He
believed the distances of the planets from each other and from the sun were an
expression of the intrinsic qualities of numerical series, not of physical forces.
He had turned from the Aristotelian picture of the world to an even older, and
if anything more mystical, Platonist or even Pythagorean picture in which there
were universal patterns to be found in different sectors of reality. Such a belief
could justify astrological predictions as well as astronomical calculations,
since what occurred in one part of reality was believed to follow the same
pattern as what occurred elsewhere. Kepler was quite prepared to make
astrological forecasts. In Prague in 1618 he predicted, ‘May will not pass
away without great difficulty.’ The forecast turned out to be correct, since the
Thirty Years War began—but hardly because of celestial movements.
Kepler was by no means alone in believing in the mystical influences of
some bodies on others. ‘Neo-Platonism’ remained influential at Cambridge
University until well into the second half of the 17th century, with people
believing that treating a knife which has cut someone could help heal the
wound—just as a magnet can affect a piece of iron some distance away.11
Galileo did most to win acceptance of the Copernican picture of the
universe when, using the recently invented telescope in 1609, he discovered
craters and mountains on the moon. This showed that it was not made of some
substance radically different to the Earth, as the Aristotle-Ptolemy account
argued. He also developed the elements of a new physics, providing an
account of how bodies move, which challenged Aristotle’s. But his was still
not a full break.12 Galileo accepted, for instance, that the universe was finite,
and he rejected Kepler’s notion that the planets moved in ellipses. To this
extent he was still a prisoner of the old ideas. He was soon to be a prisoner in
another sense as well—put on trial by the Inquisition, forced to denounce the
Copernican system and held under house arrest until his death.
The arguments over physics and astronomy became intertwined with the
general ideological arguments of the period. In 1543 Copernicus had been able
to publish his views without fear of persecution by the Catholic church to
which he belonged. Indeed some of the hardest attacks on his views came from
Luther’s disciple Melanchthon, while the reform of the calendar by the
Catholic church relied on computations based on Copernicus’s model.
But things changed with the counter-Reformation. Its supporters mobilised
behind the Aristotelian model as adopted by the theologian Thomas Aquinas
250 years earlier to resolve the philosophical arguments of the 13th century—a
model imposed on doubters at the time by the newly born Inquisition. Aristotle
(and Aquinas) had taught that everything and every person has its own place in
the scheme of things. There was a fixed hierarchy of celestial bodies and an
equally fixed hierarchy on Earth. This was the perfect world view for kings
and classes which wanted not just to destroy the Reformation but to force the
rebellious middle and lower classes to submit to the old feudal order. From
such a perspective the Copernican worldview was as subversive as the views
of Luther or Calvin. In 1600 Giordano Bruno was burnt at the stake for
suggesting there were an infinity of worlds. The ideological climate in the
Catholic states worked against further scientific investigation. On hearing
about the trial of Galileo, the French mathematician and philosopher Descartes
suppressed a finding that foreshadowed the later discoveries of Newton.13 It is
hardly surprising that the centre of scientific advance shifted to the Dutch
republic and post-revolutionary England—and to Boyle, Hook, Huygens and,
above all, Newton, whose new laws of physics solved the problems which had
plagued Copernicus’s, Kepler’s and Galileo’s accounts of the universe.
This was not because the Protestant leaders were, in themselves, any more
enlightened than their Catholic counterparts. As Keith Thomas notes,
‘theologians of all denominations’ upheld the reality of witchcraft.14 But the
popular base of Protestantism lay with social groups—artisans, lesser
merchants—who wanted to advance knowledge, even if it was only knowledge
of reading and writing so as to gain access to the Bible. The spread of
Protestantism was accompanied by the spread of efforts to encourage literacy,
and once people could read and write, a world of new ideas was open to them.
What is more, the mere fact that there was a challenge to the old orthodoxy
opened people’s minds to further challenges. This was shown most clearly
during the English Revolution. The Presbyterians who challenged the bishops
and the king could not do so without permitting censorship to lapse. But this in
turn allowed those with a host of other religious views to express themselves
freely. Amid the cacophony of religious prophecies and biblical
interpretations, people found it possible for the first time to express doubts
openly about them all. One drunken trooper in the New Model Army could ask,
‘Why should not that pewter pot on the table be God?’ The conservative
political theorist Thomas Hobbes published a thoroughly materialist work,
Leviathan, which contained attacks on the notion of religious miracles. A
group of likeminded scientists had been able to gather in the liberated
atmosphere of Oxford after the New Model Army had taken it from the
royalists and set up a society for scientific advance.
Hobbes feared he might be burned at the stake for heresy, at the time of the
Restoration. But in fact he received a royal pension and the society became the
‘Royal Society’. Science was beginning to be identified with an increase in
control over the natural world which paid dividends in terms of agriculture,
industry, trade and military effectiveness.
This did not mean the battle against superstition was won. Vast numbers of
people in advanced industrial countries still put their faith in astrologers and
charms, whether religious or ‘magical’. And this is not just true of supposedly
‘uneducated’ people. ‘World leaders’ such as Ronald Reagan, Indira Gandhi
and former French prime minister Edith Cresson have consulted astrologers. In
the 18th century the influence of magic was even greater.
But a change did occur. The professional witchfinder Matthew Hopkins
had been able to push 200 convictions for witchcraft through the courts in
England’s eastern counties in the mid-1640s amid the chaos of the unresolved
civil war. This was a far greater number than at any time previously.15 By
contrast, the occupation of Scotland by the New Model Army brought a
temporary end to prosecution for witchcraft,16 and by 1668 one commentator
could note, ‘Most of the looser gentry and the smaller pretenders to philosophy
and wit are generally deriders of the belief in witches’.17 The last witchcraft
execution in England took place in 1685, although the crime remained on the
statute book for another 50 years. A change in the general ‘mentality’ had
resulted from the economic, social and political changes of the previous
century.
Chapter 3
The Enlightenment
The most radical intellectual challenge to received ideas since the rise of class
society occurred in the aftermath of the Dutch and English revolutions. The
more intellectually aware sections of the middle, and even the upper, classes
elsewhere in Europe began to feel that their societies were defective, and
sought to bring change by changing ideas. This led to a much more far-reaching
attack on prejudice and superstition than had occurred in the Renaissance and
Reformation. The result was a current of ideas known as the Enlightenment.
This catch-all category included a range of thinkers and writers—natural
scientists, philosophers, satirists, economists, historians, essayists, novelists,
political theorists and even musicians like Mozart. They did not all hold the
same set of views. Some had diametrically opposed opinions on major
issues.18
What they shared was a belief in the power of rational understanding
based on empirical knowledge. This had to be applied to the world, even if it
meant challenging existing myths and established beliefs. Such an approach
represented a challenge to many of the institutions and much of the ideology of
existing European societies.
One influence was that of the philosophers Descartes in France, Spinoza in
Holland and Leibniz in south western Germany. They were convinced a
complete understanding of the world could be deduced from a few
unchallengeable principles of reason—a conviction which grew in the 18th
century on the basis of Newton’s success in establishing basic laws for
physics.19 These ‘rationalist’ philosophers were not necessarily political
radicals. Leibniz famously declared that the universe ran according to a
prearranged harmony, that ‘all is for the best in the best of all possible
worlds’—a view caricatured brilliantly in Voltaire’s Candide. But the
rationalist approach could become an almost revolutionary weapon in other
hands, since it implied that every institution or practice not deducible from
first principles should be rejected.
Another influence was the rather different tradition begun by John Locke in
England. He insisted that knowledge came not from the ‘innate ideas’ of the
rationalists but from empirical observation of what already existed. Locke was
just as politically conservative as Leibniz. He reflected the attitude of English
gentlemen landowners and merchants. Their aims had been achieved once
English kings agreed to govern through an upper class parliament. Yet as the
18th century wore on, increasingly radical conclusions were drawn in France
and Germany from the English empiricist approach. So Voltaire and
Montesquieu in France were great admirers of Locke, drawing from his
writings the conclusion that the countries of continental Europe should be
reformed along English lines. A conservative doctrine in England could be a
subversive one across the Channel.
The Enlightenment thinkers were not revolutionaries. They were dissident
intellectuals who looked to members of the upper class for sponsorship. They
placed their hopes not in the overthrow of society but in its reform, which
would be achieved by winning the battle of ideas. Diderot saw no
contradiction in visiting the Russian empress Catherine the Great, nor did
Voltaire in collaborating with the Prussian king Frederick the Great. Their
milieu is demonstrated by those regularly in attendance at the twice weekly
‘salons’ organised by d’Holbach’s wife, where thinkers like Diderot, Hume,
Rousseau, the future American leader Benjamin Franklin and the radical
chemist Joseph Priestley mixed with the ambassador of Naples, Lord
Shelbourne, the future French royal minister Necker and the Prince of
Brunswick.20 Voltaire insisted, ‘It is not the labourers one should educate, but
the good bourgeois, the tradesmen.’ Even the French encyclopedists, who were
zealous propagandists of the new thinking, concentrated their efforts on books
which were way beyond the financial reach of the bulk of the population (the
early editions of Diderot and d’Alembert’s Encyclopédie, in 17 volumes, sold
only 4,000 copies), through the salons of friendly aristocrats or participation in
Masonic Societies whose secret semi-religious rites brought together the
‘Enlightened’ elite of the upper and middle classes.
There were also limits to how far most of the Enlightenment thinkers were
prepared to take their critiques of existing institutions and ideas, at least in
public. So Voltaire could rage against the superstition of religion (‘écrasez
l’infame’—‘Crush the infamy’—was his slogan) and subject biblical accounts
of miracles to devastating critiques, but he was very upset when d’Holbach
published (under a pseudonym) a thoroughly atheistic work, The System of
Nature. ‘This book has made philosophy execrable in the eyes of the king and
the whole of the courts,’ he wrote.21 Gibbon, in England, could write a
pioneering history, the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, which was
scathing in its attack on the influence of the Christian church. But it was not
intended to shake the faith of the masses. The Scot David Hume did not publish
his own savage attacks on religion during his lifetime. Voltaire objected to
what he saw as Rousseau’s negative attitude to existing social institutions in
The Social Contract, while Rousseau objected to Voltaire’s ‘negative’ attitude
towards religion.
But however reluctant they were to take a radical stance, the thinkers of the
Enlightenment challenged some of the basic props of the societies in which
they lived. These were not open to easy reform, and powerful interests saw
any questioning as deeply subversive. Many of the thinkers suffered as a result.
Voltaire was beaten up by the hired thugs of an aristocrat, endured a spell of
imprisonment in the Bastille and then felt compelled to live away from Paris
for many years. Diderot was incarcerated for a period in the fortress of
Vincennes, near Paris. Rousseau spent the latter part of his life out of reach of
the French authorities across the Swiss border, and the plays of Beaumarchais
(whose Marriage of Figaro laid the basis for Mozart’s opera) were banned in
several countries for suggesting that a servant could thwart the intentions of his
master.
The church could be especially hostile to any questioning of established
ideas. In southern Europe the counter-Reformation stamped viciously on all
opposition until the second half of the 18th century. In Spain there were 700
cases of auto da fé (the burning alive of ‘heretics’) between 1700 and 1746.22
In France, Protestants could still be sentenced to slavery in the galleys and two
Protestants were broken on the wheel before being hanged in Toulouse in 1761
and Abbéville in 1766.23
By challenging such things, the thinkers raised fundamental questions about
how society was organised, even if they shied away from providing complete
answers. Voltaire’s Candide suggested that no state in Europe could fulfil
people’s needs. Rousseau began his Social Contract with the revolutionary
idea, ‘Man is born free, but everywhere he is in chains,’ even though he seems
to have put little faith in the masses himself. The philosophers d’Holbach and
Helvetius attempted thoroughgoing materialist analyses of nature and society
which rejected any notion of god.24 The naturalist Buffon put forward an
almost evolutionist theory of animal species (and insisted on the unity of the
human species, ascribing differences between ‘races’ to climatic conditions).25
The Scots Adam Ferguson and Adam Smith saw human society as progressing
through stages, of hunting, pastoralism and agriculture, and so laid the basis for
a materialist understanding of social development. Between them, the
Enlightenment intellectuals went further than anyone ever before in trying to
make sense of human beings and human institutions.
There is a sense in which their ideas became ‘hegemonic’, in that they
dominated intellectual discussion right across Europe, everywhere throwing
apologists for other views on the defensive. They received a hearing from all
those, even at the very top, who wanted the kind of ‘modern’, economically
successful society they saw in England, as opposed to the ‘antiquated’,
economically stagnant societies of continental Europe.
At various points, governments in Austria, Russia, Portugal and Poland
tried to push through certain reforms associated with Enlightenment thought
(and so are sometimes called ‘enlightened despots’ by historians). Between
1759 and 1765 the rulers of Portugal, France, Spain, Naples and Parma threw
out the Jesuits—and, under pressure from the Catholic monarchs, the pope
disbanded the order in Europe.26 In France, Turgot, one of the most prominent
‘physiocrat’ Enlightenment economists, became a minister of Louis XVI in
1774. But in each case the reforms from above were eventually abandoned.
Even ‘enlightened’ monarchs were unable to implement them in the face of
resistance from ruling classes whose wealth depended on residual forms of
feudal exploitation.
Diderot wrote in the Encyclopédie that its aim was ‘to change the general
way of thinking’.27 The Enlightenment thinkers did make a highly successful
challenge to the ideas of intellectuals, including ruling class intellectuals, and
it was a more far-reaching challenge than that of the Reformation two centuries
before. By the 1780s the works of Voltaire and Rousseau ‘did speak to an
enormous public’,28 and cheap (often pirated) versions of the Encyclopédie
sold far more copies than Diderot himself ever intended. ‘It spread through the
bourgeoisie of the ancien regime’ and ‘a progressive ideology…infiltrated the
most archaic and eroded segments of the social structure’.29 Yet the
Enlightenment thinkers were hardly effective in achieving their goal of
reforming society. Voltaire, apparently, was dispirited when he died in 1778.30
Kant noted six years later that, although ‘he was living in the Age of
Enlightenment…the age itself was not enlightened’.31
Changing ideas was not the same as changing society. It would require
another cycle of revolutions and civil wars to bring that about.
Chapter 4
Slavery and wage slavery
The ideas of the Enlightenment did not simply emerge, accidentally, from the
heads of certain thinkers. They were at least a partial reflection of changes
taking place in the relations between human beings—change which had gone
furthest in Britain and Holland.
The central change through the turmoil of the 16th and 17th centuries was
that exchange through the market played an increasingly dominant role in the
way people obtained a livelihood. The church might burn heretics and the
Habsburg armies sack urban centres opposed to their rule. But popes,
emperors, princes and lords all required cash to finance their efforts—and this
meant that, even while trying to preserve the old order, they helped spread the
market forces which would ultimately undermine it.
This was shown most clearly after the conquest of the Americas. Silver
from the American mines was key to financing the armies which backed the
counter-Reformation. But the flow of that silver was part of a new
intercontinental network of market relations. Much of it flowed through
intermediaries in north west Europe and out to China, the east Indies and India
to buy luxury goods. New international shipping routes—from Manila to
Acapulco, from Vera Cruz to Seville, from Amsterdam to Batavia32 and from
Batavia to Canton—were beginning to bind people’s lives in one part of the
world to those in another.
Market relations rest on the assumption that, however unequal people’s
social standing, they have an equal right to accept or reject a particular
transaction. The buyer is free to offer any price and the seller free to reject the
offer. Mandarin and merchant, baron and burgher, landlord and tenant have
equal rights in this respect. In so far as the market spreads, old prejudices
based on dominance and deference come under siege from calculations in
terms of cash.
The Enlightenment was a recognition in the realm of ideas of this change
taking place in reality. Its picture of a world of equal men (although a few
Enlightenment thinkers raised the question of equal rights for women) was an
abstraction from a world in which people were meant to be equally able to
agree, or fail to agree, to buy and sell goods in their possession. The ‘rational’
state was one in which this could take place without arbitrary obstruction.
Yet there were two great holes in the Enlightenment picture as applied in
the 18th century—and not just to ‘backward’ regions of Europe such as Castile,
Sicily or eastern Europe, but to Britain, the model for people like Voltaire. One
was the chattel slavery of the Americas, and the other the wage slavery of the
propertyless labourer at home.
Chapter 5
Slavery and racism
A growing amount of the wealth of 18th century Europe came from an
institution based on the very opposite of equal rights between buyers and
sellers—from enforced slavery. Philosophers might talk abut equal rights in the
coffee houses of Europe. But the sweetened coffee they drank was produced by
people who had been herded at gunpoint onto ships in west Africa, taken
across the Atlantic in appalling conditions (more than one in ten died on the
way), sold at auctions and then whipped into working 15, 16 or even 18 hours
a day until they died.
About 12 million people suffered this fate.33 A million and half died while
making the passage. The death toll on the plantations was horrendous, since the
planters found it profitable to work someone to death and then buy a
replacement. A total of 1.6 million slaves were taken to the British Caribbean
islands in the 18th century, yet the slave population at its end was 600,000. In
North America conditions (a more temperate climate and greater access to
fresh food) allowed a more rapid expansion of the slave population, through
births as well as imports, so that it grew from 500,000 at the beginning of the
century to three million at the end and six million by the 1860s. But the death
toll was still much higher than for non-slaves. As Patrick Manning points out,
‘By 1820 some ten million Africans had migrated to the New World as
compared to two million Europeans. The New World white population of 12
million was roughly twice as great as the black population’.34
Slavery was not invented in the 17th and 18th centuries, of course. It had
persisted in small pockets in different parts of Europe and the Middle East
through the Middle Ages—as a way of manning the naval galleys of the
Mediterranean states, for instance. But it was a marginal phenomenon at a time
when serfdom was the main form of exploitation, and the slavery which did
exist was not associated with black people more than any other group. Whites
could be galley slaves, and the word for slave is derived from ‘Slav’. As
Patrick Manning writes, ‘In 1500, Africans or persons of African descent were
a clear minority of the world’s slave population; but by 1700, the majority’.35
The change began with the Spanish conquest of the Americas. Christopher
Columbus sent some of the Arawaks who first greeted him to be sold as slaves
in Seville and there were attempts to use American Indians as slaves in the
Caribbean. But the efforts were not very successful. The Indian population fell
by up to 90 percent as a result of barbarous treatment and epidemics, the
Spanish conquerors found it more remunerative to extract tribute and forced
labour than to resort to outright slavery, and the Spanish crown—worried that
the Indian population would die out and leave it without any labour to work the
land—listened to the criticism of Indian slavery from priests who saw the
priority as converting the Indians to Christianity.
Crown and colonists alike turned increasingly to a different source of
labour—the buying of slaves on the coast of west Africa. Cortés started a
plantation manned by African slaves, and even the priest Las Casas, the best
known critic of the Spanish treatment of the Indians, recommended African
slavery (although he later repented giving such advice).
Slavery took off on a massive scale when Portugal, Holland, England and
France began the commercial cultivation of tobacco and sugar in their
colonies. These crops demanded a huge labour force, and free immigrants from
Europe were not prepared to provide it.
At first the plantation owners utilised a form of unfree labour from Europe.
‘Indentured servants’—in effect slaves to debt—were contracted to work for
three, five or seven years for no wages, in return for their passage across the
Atlantic. Some were kidnapped by ‘spirits’, as agents for the contractors were
known in Britain.36 Others were convicts or prisoners from the civil and
religious wars in Europe. The sugar plantations of Barbados had a labour
force of 2,000 indentured servants and 200 African slaves in 1638—with an
indentured servant costing £12 and a slave £25.37 Since neither the servant nor
the slave was likely to live more than four or five years, the servants seemed
‘better value’ to the plantation owners than the slaves.
Merchants and rulers had no moral problem with this. After all, the British
navy was manned by ‘pressed’ men—poor people kidnapped from the streets,
‘confined’ in conditions ‘not markedly better than that of black slaves’ before
leaving port,38 and facing a death toll at sea as high as that of the human ‘cargo’
of the slave boats they might be escorting.39 An act of parliament gave captains
the power to impose the death sentence for striking an officer, or even for
sleeping on watch.40
But bond slavery from Europe was not on nearly a big enough scale to
supply the labour the planation owners required as the market for tobacco and
sugar grew and they turned increasingly to Africa. By 1653, slaves
outnumbered indentured servants in Barbados by 20,000 to 8,000.41 Where
there were only 22,400 black people in the southern colonies of North
America in 1700, there were 409,500 by 1770.
At first the plantation owners treated white indentured servants and
African slaves very similarly. In Virginia servants who ran away had to serve
double time and were branded on the cheek with the letter R if they repeated
the offence. In Barbados there were cases of owners killing servants who
became too sickly to work.42 Servants and slaves worked alongside one
another, and there was at least one case of intermarriage in Virginia (something
which would be inconceivable for another 300 years).
Servants and slaves who worked together and socialised together could
also fight back together. Cases of servants and slaves helping each other to run
away began to worry the plantation owners. Their concern was highlighted by
‘Bacon’s Rebellion’ in Virginia in 1676, when opponents of the governor and
the wealthy planters offered freedom both to indentured servants and to slaves
who were prepared to help seize control of the colony. The motives of the
rebels were mixed—one of their demands was for war to seize more land from
the Indians.43 But their actions showed how poor whites and Africans could
unite against the landowners. The response of the colonial landowners was to
push through measures which divided the two groups.
As Robin Blackburn records in his history of colonial slavery, the
Virginian House of Burgesses sought to strengthen the racial barrier between
English servants and African slaves. In 1680 it prescribed 30 lashes on the
bare back ‘if any negro or other slave shall presume to lift up his hand in
opposition to any Christian’. A Virginia act of 1691 made it lawful ‘to kill and
destroy such negroes, mulattos and other slaves’ who ‘unlawfully absent
themselves from their masters’ or mistresses’ service’. It also decreed that any
white man or woman who married ‘a negro, mulatto or Indian’ should be
banished from the colony.44 In other words, the planters recognised that far
from white and black automatically hating each other, there was a likelihood of
some whites establishing close relations with the slaves—and the colonial
authorities sought to stamp this out by giving slave owners the power of life
and death. It was now that racism began to develop as an ideology.
The prevalence of racism today leads people to think it has always existed,
arising from an innate aversion of people from one ethnic background for those
from another. Slavery is then seen as a byproduct of racism, rather than the
other way round.
Yet in the ancient and medieval worlds, people did not regard skin colour
as any more significant than, say, height, hair colour or eye colour. Tomb
paintings from ancient Egypt show fairly random mixtures of light, brown and
black figures. Many important figures in Roman history came from north
Africa, including at least one emperor; no text bothers to mention whether they
were light or dark skinned. In Dutch paintings of the early 16th century, black
and white people are shown as mixing freely—as, for instance, in Jordaen’s
painting ‘Moses and Zipporah’, which shows Moses’ wife as black.45
There was often deep hostility to Jews in medieval Europe. But this was
hostility on the basis of religion, as Jews were the only non-Catholic group in
a totally Christian society, not on the basis of allegedly inherent physical or
mental characteristics. Their persecutors would leave them alone if they
sacrificed their religious beliefs. What was involved was irrational religious
hatred, not irrational biological racism. This only arose with the slave trade.
The early slave traders and slave owners did not rely on racial differences
to excuse their actions. Instead they turned to ancient Greek and Roman texts
which justified the enslavement of those captured in war, or at least in ‘just
wars’. Providing the owners had acquired their slaves by legitimate means, the
slaves were private property and could be disposed of in any way. So it was
that John Locke, the English philosopher so much admired by Voltaire, could
justify slavery in the 1690s—and, through ownership of shares in the Royal
Africa Company, be a beneficiary of the slave trade46—yet reject the idea that
Africans were intrinsically different to Europeans.47
But the old arguments were not well fitted to the scale of the Atlantic slave
economy by the mid-18th century. It was hard to claim the slaves were all
prisoners from ‘just wars’. People knew they had been bought from merchants
in Africa or born as the children of slaves.48 And the slave traders and owners
always needed arguments to use with those white people, the great majority,
who did not own slaves. In the colonies the smaller farmers were often
resentful at the way the slave owners grabbed the best land and, by using
slaves at low cost, undercut them. In ports like London escaped slaves often
found refuge in the poor slum areas. The traders and owners needed a way of
making people despise, mistrust and fear the slaves. The ‘war prisoners’
doctrine hardly did this. By contrast, ideas that those of African descent were
innately inferior to those of European descent fitted the needs of the traders and
planters perfectly.
Christian supporters of slavery claimed they had found a justification by
references in the Bible to the fate of the descendants of one of Noah’s sons,
Ham. But there were also attempts at allegedly ‘scientific’ justifications, in
terms of the ‘subhuman savagery’ of Africans—for instance in Edward Long’s
History of Jamaica, published in 1774. Such arguments enabled some thinkers
influenced by the Enlightenment to continue to support slavery.49 They could
proclaim, ‘All men are created equal,’ and add that non-whites were not men.
Racism did not emerge at once as a fully formed ideology. It developed
over some three centuries. So, for instance, the early attitude to the native
inhabitants of North America tended to be that they differed from Europeans
because they faced different conditions of life. Indeed, one problem facing the
governors of Jamestown (Virginia) was that Indian life had a considerable
attraction for white colonists, and ‘they prescribed the death penalty for
running off to live with Indians’.50 The preference of ‘thousands of Europeans’
for ‘the Indian way of life’ found a reflection in the positive view of the ‘state
of nature’ presented by influential writings like Rousseau’s.51 Even in the mid-
18th century ‘the distentions later created by the term “red men” were not to be
found…Skin colour was not considered a particularly significant feature’.52
Attitudes changed in the late 18th century as European settlers increasingly
clashed with the Indian population over ownership and use of land. There was
an increasing depiction of Indians as ‘bloodthirsty monsters’, and ‘they were
increasingly referred to as tawny pagans, swarthy philistines, copper-coloured
vermin and, by the end of the 18th century, as redskins’.53 Racism developed
from an apology for African slavery into a full-blown system of belief into
which all peoples of the Earth could be fitted as ‘white’, ‘black’, ‘brown’,
‘red’ or ‘yellow’—even though many Europeans are pinkish red, many
Africans are brown, many people from South Asia are as fair skinned as many
Europeans, Native Americans are certainly not red, and Chinese and Japanese
people are certainly not yellow!
Some 60 or more years ago the Marxist C L R James and the Caribbean
nationalist Eric Williams drew attention to the importance of slavery both in
creating racism and in developing the economies of Western Europe. In doing
so, they built on an argument put by Karl Marx about the link between chattel
slavery in the New World and wage slavery in the old.
Their argument has often been attacked since. After all, say the critics,
many of the profits from slavery were not invested in industry, but spent on
luxury mansions where merchants and absentee plantation owners could mimic
the lifestyles of the old aristocracy; and any gains to the economies of north
west Europe would have been eaten up by the cost of the wars fought over
control of the slave-based colonial trade.54 As one economic history textbook
from the 1960s puts it:
Foreign trade profits do not constitute a significant contribution to saving
destined for industrial investments…Attempts to measure slaving profits have
produced quite insignificant values in relation to total trade and investment
flows.55
But this is to abstract from the very real effects slave-based production had
on the economic life of western Europe, and especially Britain, in the 18th
century. What is usually called the ‘triangular trade’ provided outlets for its
burgeoning handicraft and putting-out industries. Ironware, guns and textiles
from Europe were sold in return for slaves to merchants on the African coast;
the slaves were transported in appalling conditions (it was financially more
remunerative to allow 10 percent to die than to provide conditions in which all
would survive the crossing) to be sold in the Americas; and the money
obtained was used to buy tobacco, sugar—and later raw cotton—for sale in
Europe.56
The sugar plantations required relatively advanced equipment for milling
the cane and refining the juice and bought it from European manufacturers. The
trade boosted the shipping and shipbuilding industries which were increasingly
important employers of skilled and unskilled labour. Some of the profits which
flowed through the trading ports of Liverpool, Bristol and Glasgow were
invested in industrial processes connected to the colonial produce or financed
new transport links (canals, turnpike roads) to the inland British market.
Slavery did not produce the rise of capitalism, but was produced by it.
English industry and agriculture were already displaying a dynamism in the
late 17th century, at a time when plantation production in the West Indies and
North America existed only in embryo. It was because of this dynamism that
the slave trade took off. The demand for colonial produce existed precisely
because a dynamic British economy led the consumption of tobacco and sugar
to spread downwards from the upper classes to the urban and even rural
masses. The looting of colonies and the enslavement of peoples could not
alone create such a domestic dynamic—the Spanish and Portuguese economies
stagnated despite their colonial empires. The British economy grew because
the growing use of free labour at home enabled it to exploit slave labour in the
Americas in a new way.
It was also the dynamism of a domestic economy increasingly based on
wage labour that enabled British (and to a lesser extent French) slavers to
obtain their human cargoes in Africa. Most of the slaves were bought from the
upper classes of African coastal states, since the slave traders themselves
were too ignorant of the African interior simply to kidnap millions of inland
people and transport them long distances to the coast. They got African
merchants and rulers to do that, supplying them in return with better quality
goods than could be obtained in other ways. But the Africans were not
‘ignorant savages’, despite the racist mythology. They lived in relatively
sophisticated, often literate societies, comparable in level to most of those of
late medieval Europe. It was only because of the first advances of capitalism
that the British economy had begun to surpass that level. A monstrous form of
commerce was thus possible in the 18th century which could not have occurred
at the time of Leo Africanus (in the early 16th century) when most African and
west European states were at a similar level of economic development.
Plantation slavery was a product of the fact that Holland and England had
already embarked on capitalist expansion. But it also fed back into capitalism,
providing it with powerful boost.
In doing so, slavery played an important role in shaping the world system
in which capitalism matured. It helped provide England with the impetus it
needed to absorb Scotland (after the Scottish ruling class’s own attempt to
establish a colony in Panama, the Darien scheme, fell apart) and to begin, in
the second half of the 18th century, to create a new empire in the east through
the East India Company’s conquest of Bengal.
The other side of the rise of Britain’s ruling class was the debilitation of
much of Africa. The slave trade provided rulers and merchants in coastal
regions with access to relatively advanced consumer goods and weapons
without having to develop their own industries—indeed, imported goods
‘undercut African industry’.57 A successful state was one which could wage
war on others and enslave their peoples. Ruling classes inclined towards
peace could only survive by becoming militaristic. When states like Jolof,
Benin and Kongo tried to stop their merchants supplying slaves, they found the
rulers of other states were gaining in wealth and power by doing so,58 while
pre-class societies faced destruction unless new military ruling classes
emerged. Those on the coast gained by plundering those inland.
Some historians have claimed the resulting growth of ‘centralised African
states’ represented a form of ‘progress’. But this was accompanied by an
underlying weakening of the material base of society. Population growth was
stunted at precisely the time it surged ahead in Europe and North America.59 In
west Africa there was even a decline in population between 1750 and 1850.60
This, in turn, left the African states ill-equipped to resist European colonial
invasion at the end of the 19th century. While western Europe moved forward
economically, Africa was held back.
Chapter 6
The economics of ‘free labour’
In 1771 a former barber and wig maker, Richard Arkwright, opened the
world’s first water powered spinning mill at Cromford in Derbyshire. He
employed 600 workers, mainly children, who could do the work of ten times
that number of hand spinners. In 1775 a Scottish mathematical instrument
maker, James Watt, joined forces with the Birmingham engineer Matthew
Boulton to produce steam engines which could turn machinery, haul enormous
loads and, eventually, propel ships and land vehicles at speeds previously
undreamed of. In 1783-84 Henry Cort devised a superior ‘puddling’ method of
smelting iron and a rolling mill for processing it.
The way was open, through integrating these inventions and others, to
develop a whole new way of producing, based upon steam powered factories
employing hundreds or even thousands of people. By the end of the century
there were 50 such factories in the Manchester area alone. It was not long
before entrepreneurs elsewhere in Europe and across the Atlantic were trying
to imitate the new methods. The world of the urban artisans and the rural
putting-out system was giving birth to the industrial city.
Just as these changes were beginning to unfold, a Scots professor set out
what he saw as the fundamental principles of the new economic system. Today
Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations is usually treated as the bible of
conservatism. But when it appeared, it represented a radical challenge to the
prevailing order in Europe and to those who still hankered after that order in
Britain.
Smith was part of the ‘Scottish Enlightenment’, a group of thinkers which
included Adam Ferguson and David Hume. They had been horrified by the
attempts of the Stuarts to use the feudal Scottish Highlands to reimpose
absolutist monarchy on England, and were determined to supplant what they
saw as an old order based on prejudice. This led them to a much closer affinity
with the European Enlightenment than most English thinkers of the time. Smith
was an admirer of the Encyclopédie and friendly with Voltaire, d’Holbach,
Helvetius and Rousseau.61 The Wealth of Nations was part of the
Enlightenment attempt to clean the world of feudal ‘irrationality’.
It contrasted modern ways of creating goods to enhance people’s lives
(‘the wealth of nations’) with old institutions and methods which prevented
these being implemented—what characterised ‘the opulent countries of
Europe’ and what prevailed ‘anciently, during the prevalency of the feudal
government’.62 It began with a description of a modern pin ‘manufactory’
where a huge increase in the productivity of labour resulted from an elaborate
division of labour which had each worker carrying out one small task.
Smith turned the traditional views of where wealth came from upside
down. In the early medieval period wealth was seen as lying in land. From the
1500s onwards ‘mercantilist’ notions which focused on wealth in gold and
silver were increasingly popular.
Smith challenged both these notions and insisted human labour was the
source of wealth. ‘The annual labour of every nation is the fund which
originally supplies it with the necessities and conveniences of life,’ he wrote.
‘Labour is the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities’.63
That labour could be used in two ways—‘productively’ or
‘unproductively’. ‘Productive’ labour helped create durable products which
could be sold, either to be consumed by those engaged in other labour or as
‘capital’ to be used in producing more goods. In either case its output helped to
create more output, making ‘the wealth’ of ‘the nation’ expand.
Labour was ‘unproductive’ when it was immediately consumed without
helping to create some new commodity. Such was the labour of ‘menial
servants’ who waited on people. Once performed, their labour simply
disappeared. A man would grow rich by employing many productive
labourers: ‘He grows poor by maintaining a multitude of menial servants.’ Just
as ‘unproductive’, Smith added, was:
…the labour of some of the most respectable orders in society…The
sovereign, for example, with all the officers both of justice and war who serve
under him, the whole army and navy, are unproductive labourers. They are…
maintained out of the annual produce of other people…In the same class must
be ranked some of the gravest and most important, and some of the most
frivolous professions: churchmen, lawyers, physicians, men of letters, players,
buffoons, musicians.64
States across Europe in the 18th century provided a host of sinecures—
well paid appointments involving no real duties—which allowed hangers-on
at the courts and in governments to live in luxurious idleness. Smith’s doctrine
was an onslaught on them. It was also an onslaught on landowners who lived
off rents without investing in agriculture. It was a demand that the developing
market system was freed from the burdens that were holding it back. It was a
programme for reform in Britain and one that could easily be interpreted as for
revolution in Europe.
Smith further argued against any attempts by the state to control trade or
conquer other lands. Left to themselves, people would always exchange the
goods produced by their own labour for a selection of the best and cheapest
goods produced by other people’s labour, he said. Everyone would concentrate
on the tasks they were best at, seeking to perform them as efficiently as
possible, and no one would have an interest in producing things not wanted by
others. The market would coordinate people’s activities in the best possible
way.
Attempts by governments to favour their own producers could only lead to
people expending more labour than was necessary. Such controls might benefit
certain interest groups, but Smith insisted they would reduce the ‘national
wealth’. Free trade was the only rational way to proceed.
In a similar way, he argued for the virtues of ‘free’ labour. Slavery might
seem an easy way of making profits. But because it prevented the slaves
applying their own initiative to their labour, it was more costly in the long run
than free labour. ‘A person who can acquire no property can have no other
interest but to eat as much and labour as little as possible,’ Smith argued.65
He was extolling the virtues of a pure market system against the feudal and
absolutist institutions out of which it was emerging. As Eric Roll explains, his
writings ‘represented the interests of a single class…He could have been
under no illusion that his main attack was directed against the privileged
position of those who were the most formidable obstacles to the further growth
of industrial capitalism’.66
Smith’s account of the new system was one sided. British capitalism had
not leapfrogged over the rest of Europe simply by peaceful market competition.
Slavery had provided some capital. The colonies had provided markets. State
expenditures had been high throughout the century and had provided
encouragement without which new, profitable and competitive industries
would not have emerged. The crutches of colonisation, of slavery and of
mercantilism had been necessary for the rise of industrial capitalism, even if it
was beginning to feel it no longer needed them.
Countries without a state able to provide such crutches suffered. This was
certainly the case with Ireland, whose native capitalists suffered as
Westminster parliaments placed restrictions on their trade. It was increasingly
true of India, as the officials of the British East India Company pillaged Bengal
without providing anything in return. Once British capitalism had established a
dominant position, capitalist classes elsewhere would need state support if
infant industries were not to be strangled at birth.
Writing when industrial capitalism was in its infancy, Adam Smith could
not see that pure market systems display an irrationality of their own. The
drive of producers to compete with one another leads, not to an automatic
adjustment of output to demand, but to massive upsurges in production
(‘booms’) followed by massive drops (‘slumps’) as producers fear they cannot
sell products profitably. It was to be another 45 years before Smith’s most
important successor, David Ricardo, added a chapter to his Principles of
Political Economy recognising that the introduction of machinery could
worsen the conditions of workers. For Smith to have done this would have
been to jump ahead of his time. However, those who want to present Smith’s
writings as the final word on capitalism today do not have the same excuse.
Finally, there was a contradiction in Smith’s argument about labour and
value which had important implications. Like almost all Enlightenment
thinkers, Smith assumed that people with unequal amounts of property are
equal in so far as they confront each other in the market. But some of his
arguments began to challenge this and to question the degree to which ‘free’
labour is that much more free than slave labour.
Smith’s assertion that labour is the source of all value led him to the
conclusion that rent and profit are labour taken from the immediate producer by
the landlord or factory owner.
As soon as land becomes private property, the landlord demands a share of
almost all the produce which the labourer can either raise or collect from it.
His rent makes the first deduction from the produce of the labour which is
employed upon land…The produce of almost all other labour is subject to the
like deduction of profit. In almost all arts and manufactures the greater part of
the workmen stand in need of a master to advance them the materials of their
work, and their wages and maintenance until it be completed. He shares in the
produce of their labour…and this share consists his profit.67
There is not harmony of interest, but a clash between the interests of the
masters and the interests of the workers:
The interests of the two parties are by no means the same. The workmen desire
to get as much as possible, the masters to give as little as possible. The former
are disposed to combine in order to raise, the latter in order to lower the
wages of labour. It is not difficult to foresee which of the two parties must,
upon all ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute and force the
other into compliance with their terms. The masters, being fewer in number,
can combine much more easily; and the law, besides, authorises or at least
does not prohibit their combinations, while it prohibits those of the
workmen…In all disputes, the master can hold out much longer. A landlord, a
farmer, a master manufacturer or merchant…could normally live a year or two
on the stocks they have already acquired. Many workmen could not subsist a
week.68
The logic of Smith’s argument was to move beyond a critique of the
unproductive hangovers from ‘feudalism’, made from the point of view of the
industrial capitalists, to a critique of the capitalists themselves—to see them as
unproductive parasites, living off profits which come from the labour of
workers. It was a logic transmitted, via the writings of Ricardo (who attacked
the landowners from the point of view of industrial capitalism), to the first
socialist economists of the 1820s and 1830s and to Karl Marx. The weapons
which the greatest political economist of the Enlightenment used to fight the old
order were then used to fight the new one.
Smith shied away from drawing such conclusions. He was able to do so by
mixing his notion that value came from labour with another contrary notion. In
this, he said the value of a commodity depended on the combined ‘revenues’
from it of landlord, capitalist and worker. Despite the circularity of the
argument (revenues depend on value, but value is the sum of the revenues), this
was the idea which was to be taken up by Malthus and the great populariser
Jean Baptiste Say and to become the orthodoxy in mainstream economics after
the death of Ricardo.
Nevertheless, Smith was the first to portray the central outlines of the new
economic system which was emerging. It was a picture which gave British
capitalists some idea of where they were going, and the would-be capitalists
of other countries some notion of what to copy. It was published just as a
century and a quarter of relative social peace was giving way to a new era of
revolutionary upheaval. Its ideas were to shape the attitudes of many of the key
actors in the new era.
Part six
The world turned upside down
Chronology
1773: ‘Boston Tea Party’.
1775: Fighting at Lexington and Bunker Hill.
1776: American Declaration of Independence.
1781: British defeat at Yorktown.
1780s to 1830s: Spread of factory system and mining in Britain.
1789: Storming of Bastille, beginning of French Revolution.
1791: Slave revolt in St Domingue.
1792: French revolutionary war, Battle of Valmy, execution of king.
1793-94: Jacobins rule France, end of feudal dues, ‘terror’.
1794 Fall of Jacobins, ‘Thermidor’.
1793-98: British take over Saint Domingue, defeated by ex-slave army.
1797: British naval mutinies.
1798: Rising against British rule in Ireland, formation of Orange Order to
combat it.
1799: Combination laws ban trade unions in Britain. Napoleon takes all power
in France.
1801-03: Napoleon tries to reimpose slavery in Haiti, imprisonment and death
of Toussaint, Dessalines leads ex-slave army to victory.
1804: Beethoven’s Eroica symphony.
1805: Napoleon becomes emperor.
1807: Hegel’s Phenomenology of Mind.
1807: Britain bans slave trade.
1810: First risings against Spanish rule in Mexico and Venezuela.
1810-16: ‘Luddites’ attack machines in north of England.
1814-15: Napoleon defeated. Restoration of old monarchs. Waterloo.
1811-18: Publication of novels by Jane Austen and Walter Scott.
1819: ‘Peterloo’ massacre of working class demonstrators.
1830: Revolution in Paris replaces one monarch by another.
1830s: Novels by Stendhal and Balzac.
1830: World’s first passenger railway.
1831: Faraday discovers electric induction.
1832: British middle class gets vote.
1834: Poor Law Amendment Act establishes workhouses in Britain.
1838-39: Chartist movement demands vote for workers.
1839-42: Opium War against China.
1842: General strike in Lancashire.
1840s to 1860s: Novels of Dickens, George Eliot, Brontës.
Mid-1840s: T’ai-p’ing rebels take control of nearly half of China.
1846-49: Great Irish Famine.
1847: The Communist Manifesto.
Spring 1848: Revolutions across Europe, unsuccessful rising in Ireland, last
great Chartist demonstration in London.
June 1848: Crushing of workers’ movement by French bourgeoisie.
1848-49: Restoration of old monarchies across Europe.
1850s and 1860s: Spread of industry to Germany and France.
1843-56: British complete conquest of northern India.
1857: Indian Mutiny.
1857-60: Second Opium War, colonial ‘concessions’ in Chinese cities.
1859: Darwin’s The Origin of Species.
1859-71: Italy unified under king.
1861: American Civil War begins. Tsar ends serfdom in Russia.
1863: Lincoln declares end of slavery.
1865: Defeat of American South.
1864: T’ai-p’ing rebels finally crushed by British led troops.
1866: Nobel discovers dynamite.
1867: Meiji revolution from above ends feudal rule of Tokugawa in Japan.
1867: Marx publishes Capital.
1870: Franco-Prussian War. Fall of Louis Bonaparte.
1871: Paris Commune, workers control city, then Republican government
attacks city, killing thousands.
1871: Bismarck establishes German Empire under Prussian monarchy.
1873: First electrical machine.
Mid-1870s: Troops withdraw from Southern states of US, rise of ‘Jim Crow’
segregation.
Chapter 1
American prologue
The military band played the tune ‘The World Turned Upside Down’ as British
forces departed from Yorktown in 1781. And so it must have seemed to
thousands of ‘Tories’ loyal to King George as they left with the troops. All the
assumptions they had grown up with about the ‘natural’ order of society had
been trampled underfoot by a victorious rebellion. Yet 99 percent of the rebels
had shared those assumptions only eight years before.
One of the rebellion’s best known figures, the veteran publicist and
politician Benjamin Franklin, had written in the 1760s, ‘Happy are we now
under the best of kings’.1 The thousands of Americans who read his newspaper
articles and almanacs agreed with him right up to 1774. In his home colony of
Pennsylvania ‘there was no conscious revolutionary tradition’.2 The Virginian
leader Thomas Jefferson was still asserting at the beginning of 1776 that
Americans had neither ‘wish nor…interest to separate’ from the monarchy.3
How did it come about that in the summer of 1776 representatives of the
13 colonies, assembled at a ‘Continental Congress’, adopted the Declaration
of Independence drafted by the same Jefferson, with its assertion that ‘all men
are created equal’? It was an overtly revolutionary statement at a time when
deference to kings and aristocrats was near-universal in Europe.
The colonies had been founded in the century and a half before with the
backing of the British crown. Ultimate political authority in each lay with a
governor appointed in London. But effective power lay with different groups in
each colony: with independent farmers in rural New England, and the
merchants and artisans in its coastal towns; with rival large landowners in
New York state, who treated their tenants in an almost feudal fashion, and with
merchants tied to Britain’s Atlantic trade in New York City; with the Penn
family (who appointed the governor) and with a handful of wealthy Quaker
families in Pennsylvania; and with slave-owning plantation owners in Virginia
and North and South Carolina, who excluded poor whites from any say. There
were also bitter social clashes within colonies: between landlords and tenants
who rose in revolt in New York’s Hudson Valley in 1766; between the
Philadelphia elite and western settlers in Pennsylvania; between ‘regulator’
small farmers and ‘Grandee’ plantation owners in the Carolinas. On top of
these, there was the continual fear of slave revolts for the Southern plantation
owners, such as that which occurred in South Carolina in 1739. Such
conflicting interests had scuppered an attempt to establish unity between the
colonies in the early 1750s.
In each colony people thought of themselves as ‘British’, not ‘American’.
After all, the colonies had grown and prospered within the orbit of Britain’s
‘Atlantic’ economy. Their combined population had grown steadily until, at
three million, it was a third of Britain’s. Their merchants and landowners
enjoyed considerable riches, and their farmers and artisans felt better off than
their forebears had been on the other side of the Atlantic. It seemed in
nobody’s interests to overturn the applecart.
From a crack to a chasm
Yet the very fact of economic expansion was pushing the merchants,
landowners and manufacturers on each side of the Atlantic to develop different
sets of interests and, with them, divergent attitudes.4 There was a growing fear
in London that the colonies might pursue policies detrimental to British
commercial interests. There was growing suspicion in the colonies that the
British government was neglecting their needs. Until the mid-1770s people like
Franklin, who acted as the representative of several of the colonies in London,
regarded these fears and suspicions as misunderstandings. But they were not
completely fanciful on either side. A clash between the colonies and Britain
was inevitable at some point.
The emerging world market system was not one, as Adam Smith and his
followers implied (and still imply today), without an economic role for the
state. Trade networks spread across the whole system, but they were
concentrated around certain cities where merchants, financiers and
manufacturers not only bought and sold but also mixed socially and applied
pressure on political authorities. Their interests were served by the growth of
rival national states, each with a much tighter political structure than that which
had characterised feudalism, and with a national language to go with it. It was
inconceivable that Britain’s capitalists would not apply pressure on the gentry
who ran its parliament to advance their interests—and it was equally
inconceivable that the capitalists of the American colonies would fail to
respond with political counter-measures of their own.
In both economics and politics, particular events often bring much longer
term trends into sharp focus. So it was in the 1760s and 1770s. The Seven
Years War of 1756-63 between Britain and France had centred on control of
colonies, especially in North America, and of the trade that went with them.
Britain defeated France in the West Indies, took control of Bengal and
conquered Canada, laying the basis for a world empire. But there was a mighty
bill to be paid for doing so.
A logical move for British ministers was to make the American colonists
pay some of the costs of the war. After all, they reasoned, the colonies had
gained enormously since a French scheme to take control of the Mississippi
valley and prevent the colonies expanding westwards had been thwarted.
So Britain imposed a series of taxes on the colonists—a tax on molasses
(raw sugar used in making rum) in 1764, a ‘stamp tax’ on a range of
transactions in 1765, a Quartering Act which made the colonists pay for the
cost of keeping British troops in America, and a tax on imports in 1767.
Each of these caused enormous resentment. People were short of cash at a
time of economic depression, and the taxes threatened to damage certain
industries. France was no longer a military threat, and the British government
wanted the extra income to lower taxes on big landowners in Britain. Above
all, the colonists were having to pay taxes for policies in which they had no
say.
In Britain, colonists argued, the House of Commons could veto any
government proposal on finance. Surely the assemblies of the different
colonies should have the same power in the Americas. Otherwise, their
fundamental ‘liberties’ were being trampled on. The language of protest was
not yet revolutionary. People saw themselves as defending their ‘liberties’ as
‘Britons’. But it led them to unite and mobilise for the first time against Britain.
The mobilisation occurred at different levels of society. At the top,
delegates from the colonies assembled for a Continental Congress and called
for a boycott of trade with Britain until the taxes were withdrawn. This
approach made any action depend upon the small group of merchants who
handled the trade.
But other forces also mobilised. Groups sprang up in all the colonies in
1765 and 1766 which called themselves the ‘Sons of Liberty’.5 They were not
made up of rich planters, large landowners, or even prosperous merchants, but
of men who ‘occupied a place between the elite and the genuine
plebeians’—‘dissident intellectuals, small intercolonial merchants and
artisans’.6 They were very similar to the ‘middling sort’ who had played such a
key role in the New Model Army of the English Revolution. There was a
tradition of popular protest and riots in the colonial towns. The Sons of Liberty
acted almost as a political party, directing such ‘traditional crowd action
toward the British question’ and serving ‘to generate new political
consciousness among many ordinary Americans’.7
The actions of the crowd went beyond a passive trade boycott. In Boston
people demolished a building thought to be an office for selling stamps and
attacked the house of a stamp distributor.8 In New York they tore down the
houses of those they saw as traitors and clashed with British soldiers stationed
in the city.9 The anger against the British was intermingled with bitterness
against the elite which flaunted its wealth at a time of general hardship.
Crowds attacked a theatre frequented by such people. ‘New York’s most
radical paper, the New York Journal, dramatised the British issue, but it also
carried essay after essay attacking the evils of high rents, rising prices and
short employment’.10
As any protest movement rises, action changes people’s ideas, and the
change in ideas leads to more action. This was certainly true in Boston and
New York in the 1760s. In New York people erected ‘liberty poles’ in protest
at British actions. Each time soldiers destroyed them, new poles were raised.
British government attempts to establish a new structure of tax collectors
simply strengthened people’s feeling that they were being imposed on from
outside. In Boston feelings rose to a crescendo in March 1770 when troops
fired on a crowd which had thrown snowballs at them and killed five people—
the ‘Boston Massacre’.
The British government retreated for a time, under pressure at home from
many City of London merchants and the rioting London crowds which followed
John Wilkes. It dropped all the new taxes except one on tea, and the American
agitation subsided.
Yet that could not be the end of the matter. The resentment at any attempt to
impose taxation was greater than ever among those who had experienced
repression in Boston and elsewhere. Within British ruling circles the fear that
the colonies were intent on pursuing their own interests regardless of Britain
was also greater than ever. If they were not taught a lesson, disobedience
would become an unbreakable habit and the whole point of having colonies
would be lost.
From snowballs to musket balls
There are times in history when one small action can cause an explosion, just
as a pinprick can burst a balloon. That small action occurred in Boston harbour
in November 1773. An East India Company ship was delivering a cargo of tea,
with which the governor’s sons intended to break the boycott against the
remaining tax. While thousands protested on the shore, 100 activists dressed as
Native Americans boarded the ship and threw the tea overboard.
Respectable leaders of colonial opinion were horrified. It was ‘an act of
violent injustice’ stormed Benjamin Franklin.11 But it found a powerful echo
among those already bitter at the British government—and it was the last straw
for that government. It appointed a General Gage as governor of
Massachusetts, with a mandate to bring the colony to heel, dispatched troops to
Boston and passed the Intolerance Acts which decreed that colonists breaking
the laws would be hauled to Britain for trial.
The issue was no longer taxation. It was whether the inhabitants of the
colonies would have any say in the laws governing them—as Jefferson put it,
‘whether 160,000 electors in the island of Great Britain give law to four
million in the states of America’12 (conveniently forgetting that in his own
Virginia, black slaves and many poor whites had no say whatever). All the
colonies were threatened. There was a wave of outrage throughout them, and
committees sprang up to give expression to it. The tea boycott spread, and the
13 colonial assemblies agreed to send delegates to another Continental
Congress.
The people at the Congress were, by and large, respectable property
owners. They had risen to prominence within the structures of the British
Empire and had no desire to overthrow them. Given the choice, they would
have preferred things to continue in the old way. But that was not an option.
They called for a new trade boycott. But the severity of the measures taken by
the British government meant that such a boycott could not just be left to the
merchants. It had to be reinforced by the organisation of mass resistance. In
every ‘county, city and town’, people had to elect committees to agitate against
buying or consuming British goods.13
This was not a problem for the planters of Virginia, who joined with
Massachusetts in pushing for the boycott. They controlled all the structures of
the colony apart from the governor. They could impose their will without
disturbance. But elsewhere it raised a thousand and one questions.
In Massachusetts popular opinion was near-unanimous against the British
measures. But judges in places such as Worcester county had decided to
implement the new laws. What should be done? In New York many of the
wealthier merchants profited from Britain’s imperial trade and were reluctant
to follow the boycott, while the powerful landowning families would follow
the lead of the British governor. Again, what was to be done? In Pennsylvania,
much of the Quaker merchant elite would put ‘loyalty’ to Britain above the call
of their fellow colonists. What was to be done there?
The call for committees to impose the boycott implied, whether the
Continental Congress recognised the fact or not, the revolutionary replacement
of old institutions by new ones.
Class and confrontation
In Worcester county armed farmers had to prevent the courts functioning, even
though it meant confronting not British officials but local judges intent on
continuing successful careers.14 In New York City ‘carrying through the
decisions that led to independence meant getting rid of…the old…authorities
as much as it did breaking with parliament and the king’. The energy to do so
‘came from the “people”, both in the crowds and in the revolutionary
committees’. It was ‘mechanics’ (artisans), meeting every week in plenary
session, who pushed for the establishment of an ‘official’ committee, and then
for the replacement of its Royalist members by ‘mechanics, traders and lesser
professionals’.15 In Philadelphia a meeting of 1,200 mechanics prodded
younger members of the merchant elite into calling a mass meeting of several
thousand to set up a committee.
The move from a ‘peaceful’ boycott to war also resulted from direct action
from below. After British troops shot down parading militiamen at Lexington
in Massachusetts, it was an artisan, Paul Revere, who made a famous ride to
warn armed local farmers that a column of British troops was on its way to
seize arms hidden at Concord, near Boston. It was those farmers who fought
the British at the battle of Lexington and then descended on Boston to besiege
the British garrison at Bunker Hill. In each case, members of the middling and
lower classes had to push aside hesitant upper class people connected with the
British establishment.
As Edward Countryman rightly stresses in his two excellent books on the
revolution, the struggle only advanced because people set up new institutions
in opposition to old elites: ‘Between 1774 and the summer of 1776 those
committees did in New York what similar bodies would do in Paris between
1789 and 1792 and Russia in 1917’.16
Such agitation was central to the events of 1776. In New York there was
bitter hostility to any action against Britain from rich merchants connected to
the Atlantic trade, officials dependent on the governor, and some of the great
landowners. In Philadelphia the majority in the Pennsylvania Assembly were
adamantly opposed to independence. The war against Britain could not
succeed without the support of these two cities. But this support could only
come as a result of challenges to the old economic and political elites. New,
more radical people, mainly from artisan or small trader rather than rich
merchant or landowner backgrounds, had to win control of the committees—
which, by deciding on what could be imported and exported, exercised
enormous influence over the life of the cities.
Pamphlets as weapons
The old upper class political establishments did not simply disappear. They
relied on the mental habits of generations to maintain deference to their rule
and to blunt resistance to Britain.
Breaking those habits and that deference required both mass agitation and
mass propaganda. The mass agitation took the form of argument for the boycott,
parades against boycott breakers, the burning of effigies of governors and
British ministers, and the ransacking of buildings. The propaganda involved
taking on and tearing apart the arguments used to back up the old ways of
thinking. In 1776 alone more than 400 pamphlets appeared, as well as scores
of newspapers and magazines. But the decisive role was played by a 40 page
pamphlet written by a recent British immigrant, Tom Paine.
Paine had arrived in Philadelphia early in 1775 with a letter of
recommendation from Benjamin Franklin. He was a typical product of the
‘middling’ layer of artisans and small traders who were beginning to play a
central role in political life. In England he had been variously a skilled corset
maker, a seaman, an exciseman and an innkeeper. When he arrived in America
aged just over 40, he found employment on a newly founded magazine which
circulated among similar people. Like his audience, he was an enthusiastic
supporter of the boycott, but not yet a revolutionary. He later wrote that
‘attachment to Britain was obstinate and it was at that time treason to speak
against it’.17 The events of 1775—especially the increasing harshness of the
repression by Britain—changed his mind, until he was convinced of the case
for an independent republic. It was this which he presented in his pamphlet
Common Sense, printed early in 1776.
The pamphlet was written in a popular style, using the language of the
artisan and trader rather than that of governors and assemblymen. But it was
not simply an agitational work. It sought to provide general arguments to justify
the agitational demands. It did so by taking up some of the intellectual ideas
which had been circulating for the previous century and a quarter—ideas
culled from Hobbes, Locke, Voltaire and, probably, Rousseau—and presenting
them in ways the common person could understand. Paine would have come
across some of the ideas of the Enlightenment by attending popular scientific
lectures and debating clubs in England. Now he translated these ideas into the
language of the street and the workshop, insisting that ‘of more worth is one
honest man to society than all the crowned ruffians that ever lived’. He scorned
George III’s alleged ‘right to rule’, derived from his descent from a ‘French
bastard’ leading a gang of ‘banditti’.
Common Sense had an astounding effect. It sold perhaps 150,000 copies.
The Pennsylvania politician Benjamin Rush later told how:
Its effects were sudden and extensive on the American mind. It was read by
public men, repeated in clubs, spouted in schools, and delivered, in one
instance, instead of a sermon by a clergyman.18
It was one of those points in history when arguments suddenly make people
see things differently. The radical movement in Pennsylvania gained impetus
and was prepared to take revolutionary measures.
Many of the wealthy merchants and large landowners remained loyal to the
monarchy and still influenced sections of the population which had not been
drawn into struggle in the previous two years. They won three out of four seats
in an election vital for control of the assembly, and it seemed any scheme to
win Pennsylvania’s backing for a declaration of independence was doomed.
Yet without such backing things would be all but impossible for the other
colonies.
The radical supporters of independence saw there was only one option
open to them—that which was taken by the New Model Army during the
English Revolution and which was to be taken again in the Russian Revolution
150 years later. They had to build an activist movement outside the assembly to
overthrow its decision. A meeting of 4,000 called for a convention of
delegates to decide on the colony’s future, and the call received the support of
the Committee of Privates, made up of representatives of the colony’s militia.
The old assembly was suddenly powerless, with no armed force at its
disposal. It adjourned on 14 June, never to reconvene, and on 18 June the
popular convention met to draw up the most radical constitution yet seen
anywhere. This gave the vote to 90 percent of the male population, but denied
it to anyone who would not foreswear allegiance to the king. The ground was
cleared for the Declaration of Independence by the Continental Congress a few
days later.
The founding of the new United States could only happen because the
section of Pennsylvania’s population who backed independence took
‘dictatorial’ measures against those intent on clinging to the monarchy.
Civil war within the revolution
The American Revolution is often presented as having been relatively free of
bloodshed, consisting of a handful of set piece battles between two regular
armies. But in fact the ‘civil war’ element to it meant it was very bloody
indeed in some places. The Tryon Valley area of New York was controlled by
a powerful Royalist landowning family, the Johnsons, who set out to crush all
opposition. ‘By the time the war was over, according to some estimates, 700
buildings had been burnt, 12,000 farms abandoned, hundreds of thousands of
bushels of grain destroyed, nearly 400 rebel women made widows and some
2,000 children of revolutionaries orphaned’.19 In areas where the rebel side
was stronger, measures had to be taken that infringed people’s normal ‘rights’
if Royalists were to be prevented from giving aid to British forces. So the
committees censored Royalist publications, confiscated the land of those who
joined the Royalist army and annulled debts to Royalist merchants and
financiers; crowds tarred and feathered Royalist judges and ran Tories naked
through the streets. New York City was under British occupation for much of
the war, and when the rebels returned they organised popular feeling against
those who had aided the British. No fewer than 20,000 Royalists left the city
with the British ships in 1783.20 The struggle may have begun as a tea party,
but it certainly did not end as one.
As the war dragged on and food shortages developed, the committees had
to prevent merchants exporting food to Royalist areas and ensure there was
food for the mass of people who backed the movement. They imposed heavier
taxation on the well off, controlled prices and confiscated the land of traitors.
These were necessary measures if the war was to be won. But they were also
measures which benefited the poor at the expense of the rich. The revolt
necessarily took on a social as well as a national dimension.
It could not have succeeded otherwise. The British strategy was to
separate the colonies from one another by seizing New York, cause hardship
by blockading coastal trade, and then march powerful armies to seize strategic
points and towns. The British expected their mercenary soldiers to defeat the
inexperienced militiamen easily, causing a loss of heart once the initial
enthusiasm of the revolt wore off. They also expected merchants and
landowners to withdraw from the revolt and accede to British rule as their
armies enjoyed success.
The strategy was not completely misconceived. There was a falling away
of enthusiasm in the rebel armies as hardship grew. There were many
collaborators with British rule in New York and, again, when they seized
Philadelphia. The rebel armies did spend much of the war retreating before
better armed and better disciplined Royalist troops. The bulk of the rebel army
had to spend a bitter winter encamped outside occupied Philadelphia. The
British strategy was eventually doomed for a single reason—the committees
and the agitation had cemented the mass of people to the rebel cause. So long
as mass resistance persisted, the rebel army could wear down the Royalist
forces by retreating before them and then choosing the time for a surprise
attack.
The war was never reducible simply to class questions. In Virginia, the
richest planters were happy to involve themselves in the struggle—
Washington, a plantation owner, commanded the American army, Jefferson,
another slave-owner, wrote the Declaration of Independence. In New York,
some landowners and merchants supported the British, but others joined the
war against them. Even in Pennsylvania, a wealthy person like Benjamin
Franklin could eventually break with his old friends in the local political
establishment and become an enthusiast for independence.
What is more, eventual success depended on the ability of these people to
forge an alliance with the French monarchy against Britain. French advisers
helped Washington direct the rebel army, and the French navy delivered arms
and weakened the hold of the British blockade.
Just as there were sections of the upper class which sided with the
rebellion, there were many lower and middle class people who did not
embrace the struggle for independence. Sometimes this was because they did
not feel the tax question intruded on their own interests sufficiently to break
with the loyalties they had been brought up to see as sacred. However,
sometimes it was because the local figures most identified with the struggle
were those at whose hands they had suffered in the past. So in New York state,
many tenants supported the British because a hated landlord was against them.
Similarly, in parts of North and South Carolina, poor farmers took up arms as
Tory guerrillas because of their bitterness against plantation owners who were
for independence, leading to bloody reprisals on both sides.
The British even succeeded in getting more support than the revolutionary
armies from the two most oppressed groups in North America—the black
slaves and the Native Americans. The Royalist governor of Virginia offered
freedom to slaves who would fight for the British. A sizeable number did, and
left with the British armies at the end of the war.21 By contrast, when Congress
suggested in 1779 that blacks in Carolina and Georgia be offered their freedom
in return for joining the rebel army, the state governments would not even
consider it.22 This did not mean the whole independence movement was pro-
slavery. In New England many radicals regarded slavery as an abomination
and many individual blacks fought alongside whites in local militias.
Massachusetts and Vermont abolished slavery in 1780, and Philadelphia voted
to phase it out. In Maryland, poor whites and blacks talked of making common
cause, and even in Virginia some of the planters began to think slavery was an
institution they could do without.23
The British also found it easier than the colonists to gain ‘Indian’ allies,
since settlers and speculators alike were intent on grabbing territory from
them, and some of those most radical in the fight against the British were also
most hostile to the native peoples.
Yet the American Revolution was more than just a political break of the
colonies from Britain. Out of the turmoil of the war emerged a society which
had shaken off features which harked back to a pre-capitalist past. The feudal
rights of the great landowners in New York disappeared. The deference of
people for the ‘great families’ was shaken. Hundreds of thousands of people in
the northern and central colonies were won to ideas of human equality and
liberty from oppression which, they could see, should apply to black people as
well as white. For many followers of the Enlightenment in Europe, the
language of the Declaration of Independence seemed a living fulfilment of their
ideals.
The radical forces which had done so much to fortify the revolution did not
keep power in their own hands anywhere. In places such as Pennsylvania they
were able, for a time, to implement measures which brought real benefit to the
middle and lower classes. There were state constitutions which gave all men
the vote, annual assemblies, measures to protect farmers against debt and
controls on prices. But by the time the states agreed to a Federal Constitution
in 1788, forces wedded to the creation of an all-American free market had
gained control of the state assemblies. This cleared the ground for economic
change on a scale that would have been inconceivable otherwise, but also
brought the spread and intensification of new and old forms of oppression and
exploitation.
Chapter 2
The French Revolution
‘Here and today begins a new age in the history of the world,’ wrote Goethe,
the foremost representative of the Enlightenment in Germany, in the summer of
1792.
A year previously, the Dutch conservative patrician van Hagen-dorp had
seen the way things were going. ‘In all nations’ two great parties were forming,
he wrote. One, the party of the church and state, believed in ‘a right
government to be exercised by one or several persons over the mass of people,
of divine origin and supported by the church’. The other denied any right of
government, ‘except that arising from the free consent of all those who submit
to it’ and held ‘all persons taking part in government accountable for their
actions’.24
What excited Goethe was that these two great ‘parties’ had confronted each
other on the field of battle at Valmy, in northern France, and the second party
had won. The forces of the French Revolution had defeated the armies of half
the monarchies of Europe.
Ten years earlier nothing would have seemed more absurd to most thinking
people than the idea of a revolution in France, let alone one that would set all
Europe ablaze. The French monarchy had ruled for well over 1,000 years and
had enjoyed unchallenged power for 140 years. Louis XIV, the ‘sun king’, and
his great palace at Versailles symbolised the consolidation of an enduring
‘absolutism’ which had made France the greatest power in Europe, such had
been the inheritance of his successors Louis XV and Louis XVI.
Yet in the summer of 1789 that power had suddenly begun to fall apart. The
king had summoned representatives of the three ‘estates’ which made up
French society—the clergy, the nobles and the rest of the population, the ‘third
estate’—to discuss ways of raising taxes. But the representatives of the third
estate had refused either to bow to the nobles or to do what the king told them.
They proclaimed themselves a ‘National Assembly’ and, gathering on a tennis
court after the king had locked them out of their hall, swore an oath not to
disperse until he gave them a constitution. The king responded by summoning
20,000 troops and sacking his chief minister, Necker, supposedly sympathetic
to the call for reform.
Chronology of the French Revolution
1787-88: Aristocrat reaction resists taxes on big estates, king agrees to call
Estates-General.
April 1789: Meeting of Estates-General in Versailles.
June 1789: Third Estate delegate declare themselves National Assembly.
July 1789: Parisian crowd storms Bastille.
October 1789: Women’s march on Versailles, king dragged back to Paris,
Lafayette’s national guards begin to dominate city, constitutional monarchy.
July 1790: Feast of Federation in Paris, celebration of ‘harmony’ between king
and people.
Spring 1791: King tries to flee Paris.
July 1791: Guards massacre people in Champs de Mars.
August 1791: Beginning of slave rising in Saint Domingue (Haiti).
September 1791: Constitution with tight property qualification.
January 1792: Food riots in Paris.
April 1792: Girondin government declares war on Austria and Prussia, serious
military defeats.
August 1792: Insurrectionary journée in Paris, arrest of the king, Danton joins
government.
September 1792: Victory at Valmy, election of Convention by male adult
suffrage.
January 1793: Execution of king.
February 1793: Britain joins war.
Spring 1793: Advance of invading armies towards Paris, Royalist risings in
west of France (Vendée).
May-June 1793: Insurrection in Paris, Jacobin government led by
Robespierre and Danton, civil war.
Summer 1973: Murder of Marat, end of all feudal payments, Royalists hand
Toulon to British.
September 1793: Journée in Paris, law setting maximum prices, beginning of
Terror.
October-December 1793: Defeat of Royalist and Girondist revolts.
February 1794: Jacobins end slavery throughout French Empire.
March-April 1794: Execution first of Hébert, then of Danton, by Jacobins,
revolutionary armies successful on all fronts.
June-July 1794: ‘Great Terror’.
July 1794: ‘Thermidor’, execution of Robespierre and other Jacobins.
November-December 1794: Jacobin club closed, repeal of ‘maximum’ laws
for prices.
March-May 1795: Vicious suppression of last popular rising, 1200 arrests, 36
executions.
September 1795: New constitution with restricted suffrage, government relies
on Bonaparte to suppress royalist rising, real power with five man Directory.
November 1799: Bonaparte seizes power, becomes ‘first consul’.
1804: Bonaparte makes himself Emperor Napoleon I.
The delegates of the third estate were all from the respectable middle
class, and most from the wealthier parts of it. Half were lawyers, the rest
mostly merchants, bankers, businessmen and wealthy middle class landowners.
There was not a single artisan or peasant. They were also almost all convinced
of the need for a monarchy, albeit a ‘constitutional one’, and for rigid property
qualifications in any electoral system. But they were not prepared simply to be
crushed, and the arguments in Versailles were creating a ferment among vast
numbers of people in Paris who had never thought of politics before. Clubs
emerged, initially among well off members of the middle class, at which
people discussed what was happening. A host of news sheets and pamphlets
appeared. Some 400 representatives of the Parisian middle class met in the
city hall and declared themselves the city council, or ‘commune’.
The fall of the Bastille and after
Rumours of a pending military coup stirred the masses of the city as never
before. On 12 July crowds from the poorer sections of the city demonstrated,
seizing any muskets they could find. Two days later a vast number marched on
the symbol of royal domination over the city, the Bastille fortress, 100 feet high
and surrounded by an 80 foot moat. This was not just some protest
demonstration. Powder for muskets was stored in the building, and
innumerable opponents of the regime had been imprisoned there. The crowd
was determined to capture it. The defenders opened fire with cannon. Three
hours of shooting followed, causing 83 deaths. People dragged out cannon of
their own, seized from the Hotel des Invalides. After threatening to blow up
the fortress and the popular district around it, the commander surrendered the
Bastille to the masses. Revolution had taken hold of the capital—an example
soon to be followed in town after town across the country.
The fall of the Bastille was the first great turning point in the revolution.
The action of the Parisian masses emboldened the National Assembly to
decree the abolition of feudalism (although it expected the peasants to pay
compensation for the ending of feudal dues) and to pass a ‘declaration of the
rights of man’, similar in tone to the American Declaration of Independence.
Further mass action thwarted another attempt by the king to stage a military
coup. Women from the poorer areas of Paris marched to Versailles, pulling
20,000 armed men behind them. They broke into the palace and forced the king
to return with them to Paris, where he would be under popular surveillance.
This was still a long way short of the overthrow of the monarchy. The
crowd which attacked the Bastille and the women who marched on Versailles
did so very much on their own initiative, prompted by the food shortages
hitting poor areas as well as by hatred of the king’s aristocratic friends. But
they still accepted the leadership of the official representatives of the third
estate—upper middle class men who wanted only limited change. These
concentrated the new armed power in Paris in the hands of a National Guard
recruited almost exclusively from the better off sections of the middle class.
Presiding over it was Lafayette, a former general and aristocrat, whose
‘democratic’ credentials came from acting as an official French adviser in the
American War of Independence. Under his leadership the assembly set about
framing a constitution which restricted the vote, through a steep property
qualification, to so-called active citizens and left the king with the power to
delay new laws by two years. People were expected to rejoice at a new order
built around the ‘unity’ of the king and the assembly, of the rich and the poor.
Many did at first. There was a general feeling of liberation and exaltation
when the king, ex-aristocrats, the middle classes and the Parisian masses
jointly commemorated the first anniversary of the fall of the Bastille at a great
‘festival of the federation’.
The sense of unity did not last long. The aristocrats bitterly resented the
loss of their old privileges, even though they hung on to their wealth. Many
were to move abroad, from where they plotted the overthrow of the revolution
with those who stayed behind. The king and queen wrote secretly to other
monarchs, urging a foreign invasion.
At the same time, there was growing bitterness among the masses of both
country and town at the fact that material conditions had not improved.
Already, the summer of 1789 had seen a wave of discontent among the
peasantry—‘the great fear’—which involved the invasion of aristocratic
chateaux and burning of titles to feudal dues. In the cities and market towns
there was repeated agitation over food shortages, price rises and
unemployment which merged into a hatred for aristocrats and speculators.
There was a ferment of ideas, encouraged by a proliferation of newspapers—
250 burst into print in the last six months of 1789 alone—and the influence of
political clubs where people met to debate what was happening. The best
known of these was the Jacobin club in Paris, dominated by a lawyer from the
northern town of Arras, Robespierre, and corresponding with scores of other
such clubs throughout the country. Another lawyer, Danton, dominated the
Cordelier club, which was cheaper to join and so closer to the masses, its
members much influenced by the daily newssheet L’Ami du Peuple written by
Jean Paul Marat.
Yet for more than two years Lafayette’s ‘moderate’ constitutional
monarchism dominated the political terrain. An attempt by the king to flee
Paris in June 1791 to join counter-revolutionary armies gathering across the
border was only thwarted by the prompt action of a village postmaster in
summoning the local militia. The dominant faction in the assembly rejected any
challenge to the monarchy. ‘The revolution is over,’ they proclaimed and
spread the story that the king had been kidnapped. ‘The greatest danger’, said
one leader, Barnave, would be ‘the destruction of the monarchy’, for it would
mean ‘the destruction of the concept of property’.25 Jean Paul Marat was
driven into hiding and a spell in exile in Britain. ‘Le Chapelier’ laws banned
unions and strikes. The National Guard opened fire on thousands of people
queuing to sign a republican petition in the Champ de Mars—the venue of the
Festival of Federation almost 12 months before. Fifty died in a massacre rarely
mentioned by those who weep over the subsequent fate of the queen, Marie
Antoinette.
Repression could not stop rising popular agitation, however. Food
shortages, price rises and unemployment drove the artisans and tradespeople
(known as sans-culottes because the men wore trousers rather than the
breeches of the wealthy classes) as well as the labourers to the point of
desperation. January and February 1792 saw food riots in Paris, while in the
countryside bands of poor peasants descended on markets to impose price
reductions on corn and bread. One of the Jacobins, Hébert, produced a paper
Le Père Duchesne, specially directed at sans-culottes readership. Jacques
Roux, a popular priest in one of the poorest quarters, built a group of
followers, described by their enemies as the enragés (‘madmen’), who
articulated the elemental hatred of the poor for the aristocrats and rich. A
growing number of sans-culottes joined political clubs and flocked to regular
‘section’ meetings held in each part of Paris. A revolutionary women’s
organisation led by an ex-actress, Claire Lacombe, built support among those
who had participated in the food protests and the march on Versailles.
Repression could not paper over the splits at the top of society either. The
king and queen were still plotting with the counter-revolutionary armies
abroad. The ‘moderates’ who ran the government fell out among themselves,
torn between fear of these plots and fear of the masses below. Within the
Jacobin club a group known as the Brissotins (after one of their leaders,
Brissot) or Girondins, who saw themselves as less radical than Robespierre
and Danton, began to manoeuvre to replace Lafayette in the government.
Each of these rival groupings believed there was a simple solution to their
problems—war against the foreign armies that had gathered across France’s
northern borders. The king believed war would lead to defeat by foreign
troops who would restore his full power. Lafayette believed it would enable
him to become a virtual dictator. The Girondins believed they would benefit
from a wave of nationalist enthusiasm. The most determined opposition to war
came from Robespierre, so often portrayed by historians and popular novelists
as a bloodthirsty monster. He argued in the Jacobin club that war would open
the door to counter-revolution. But he could not stop the Girondins from
agreeing with the king to form a government and then declaring war on Austria
and Prussia in April 1792.
Revolutionary war
The war began disastrously. The French army suffered serious defeats—partly
because its generals had a tendency to go over to the enemy—and the king tried
to use the resulting chaos as an excuse to get rid of the Girondins. The Duke of
Brunswick proclaimed on behalf of the invading army that it would impose
‘exemplary vengeance’ if victorious and ‘hand over the city of Paris to
soldiery and punish the rebels as they deserved’.26
The threat of counter-revolution backfired. It prompted a new up-swell of
activity from below. There was a feeling among the mass of the population that
foreign invasion threatened everything gained in the previous three years.
Thousands of people, ‘passive citizens’ officially deemed too poor to vote,
flooded into the sections, the regular mass assemblies in each Parisian
locality. A call from the National Assembly for volunteers to fight the counter-
revolutionary invasion led to 15,000 signing up in Paris alone. Fédérés, active
enthusiasts for the revolution, began to march to Paris from provincial towns—
most notably those from Marseilles, whose marching tune became the anthem
of the revolution. All except one of the 48 section meetings in Paris demanded
a republic. Local National Guard units in the poorer areas were increasingly
influenced by the revolutionary mood.
It was not only the poor who were frightened by the spectre of counter-
revolution, so were the radical sections of the middle class led by
Robespierre, Danton and Marat. They saw that defeat stared them all in the
face unless they made a further revolution. They did so on 10 August 1792, the
second great turning point of the revolution. Tens of thousands of sans-culottes
from the sections joined the fédérés to march on the Tuileries palace. National
Guards who were meant to be defending the king joined the insurrection and it
defeated the royal troops after a battle in which 600 royalists and 370
insurgents died.
The Parisian masses were once again in control of the city. The Assembly,
made up of ‘moderate’ representatives elected under the property qualification
less than a year before, bowed to the new power. It voted to suspend the king,
recognise the new revolutionary commune based on the Parisian sections, and
organise new elections based on universal male suffrage. The Girondins were
back running the government, but had to give three positions to Jacobins—most
notably to Danton, who became minister of justice.
These changes alone were not enough to defeat the threat from outside. The
French army continued to suffer defeat as the foreign armies—now joined by
the likes of Lafayette—marched towards Paris. There were hordes of nobles
and royalists in the capital, many in poorly guarded prisons, waiting for the
opportunity to wreak revenge for the humiliations of the past three years. The
officer corps of the army and the government administration were stuffed with
royalist sympathisers.
Only two things could deal with the threat to the revolution—sending large
numbers of eager revolutionary volunteers to confront the enemy at the front,
and decisive action to stop further coups by monarchists and aristocrats at the
rear. The Girondins who dominated the government were not capable of
fulfilling either task. But Danton displayed the energy needed to tap the popular
mood. ‘Audacity, audacity and still more audacity’ was his slogan as he used
enthusiastic revolutionary volunteers from the poorer areas of Paris to breathe
new life into the armies at the front.
In Paris, too, the masses took a decisive initiative. Spurred on by Marat,
they took the crushing of domestic counter-revolution into their own hands.
They descended on the prisons and summarily executed those they believed to
be royalists in what became known as the ‘September massacres’.
The move was a response by crowds who knew they would face the gibbet
or the guillotine themselves if the enemy took Paris, and who also knew many
people in high places were ready to aid that enemy. They had already seen
friends and neighbours suffer—in the massacre at the Champ de Mars, in the
slaughter at the front where officers sided with the enemy, and from the hunger
brought by the shortage of bread. They had to do something. Unfortunately, in
the panic and without organisations of their own to guide them, the crowds
were easily drawn into indiscriminate killing of those in prison, so that
ordinary prisoners died alongside rabid opponents of the revolution.
Nevertheless, the action had the effect of intimidating and subduing the royalist
fifth column in the city.
On 20 September the revolutionary army halted the invading forces at
Valmy. The next day the new Convention—the first legislature of any country in
history to be elected by the vote of the whole male population—abolished the
monarchy and declared France ‘the republic, one and indivisible’.
Not only had the king gone, so had very many features regarded as
irremovable only three years before. The remnants of feudalism were now
swept away in deed as well as word, as were the tithes which people had been
forced to pay to keep bishops and abbots in luxury. The superstitions of the
church were no longer propped up by the might of the state. There were plans
to encourage education and extend scientific knowledge, bringing the ideas of
the Enlightenment into everyday life. The customs posts which impeded trade
routes in order to benefit local notables were gone. In the volunteer militia
units at the front ordinary soldiers voted for their fellows to become officers.
No wonder Goethe believed a new era had begun.
Yet the revolution was far from over. The next two years saw a further
radicalisation both in the government and at the base of society. Then, in the
summer of 1794 there was a sudden falling back of the revolutionary wave,
allowing new inequalities and some old privileges to re-emerge in what
became, eventually, a new monarchy. In the process there occurred the famous
‘terror’ which has so befogged many people’s understanding of—and sympathy
for—the revolution. The execution of the king, agreed on by the narrowest of
majorities in the Convention, was followed by the execution of many other
aristocrats and the queen. Then the Jacobins sent Girondin leaders to the
guillotine; Robespierre and Saint-Just sent Danton and Hébert to the guillotine;
and finally, Robespierre and Saint-Just themselves were sent to the guillotine
by the ‘Thermidorians’—a coalition of former supporters of the Girondins,
Danton and Hébert. It was this grisly spectacle which popularised the saying,
‘Revolutions always devour their own children’27—and with it, the
implication that revolutions are always futile and bloody enterprises.
It is a false generalisation. The English Revolution did not devour its
leaders—that task was left to the Restoration executioners—and neither did the
American Revolution. It is an observation which also fails utterly to grasp the
real forces at work in France.
The roots of revolution
Any brief account of revolutionary events necessarily concentrates on eye
catching events and the best known personalities. But a revolution is always
more than that. It involves a sudden change in the balance of social forces,
resulting from slow, often imperceptible developments over long periods of
time. It can only be understood by looking at those developments.
At the top of the old society—usually known as the ancien régime—were
the monarchy and the nobility. The traditional feudal aristocracy of the
noblesse d’epée (nobility of the sword) retained a privileged position in
France which it had long since lost in Britain. The French monarchy had over
the centuries cut back on some of the independent power of the great nobles. It
had been able to do so by using the towns and the new, moneyed ‘bourgeois’
classes as a counterweight to the great aristocrats. The monarchs of the 16th
and 17th centuries had given institutional expression to this by selling positions
in the state administration and the courts to sons of the moneyed classes, who
soon became a new hereditary nobility, the noblesse de robe (nobility of the
robe). This group dominated the law courts (confusingly for English speakers,
known as parlements) which implemented royal decrees.
Finally, there was yet another form of nobility consisting of the great
‘princes’ of the church—bishops and abbots. These enjoyed wealth
comparable to the great aristocrats, while the mass of priests lived in
conditions hardly better than the peasants. The upper clergy owed their
positions to royal patronage—which, in turn, was dependent on influence at
court. So it was possible for someone like Charles Maurice de Talleyrand—a
member of one of the old aristocratic families, ‘lacking in all apostolic
virtues’28 and who had not even completed holy orders—to be given an
important abbotship at the age of 21. Like the nobles, the upper clergy paid no
taxes yet received the rents and feudal dues from vast tracts of land as well as
church tithes.
No major section of the nobility showed any inclination to give up of its
privileges. Indeed, as the costs involved in maintaining a life of luxurious
consumption rose, the nobility set out to increase them—by greater severity in
the enforcement of feudal dues, by taking over parts of the communal property
of peasant villages, and by monopolising lucrative positions in the state, the
army and the church. There was a ‘violent aristocratic reaction’.29
This was while France was experiencing considerable industrial growth,
particularly in rural handicraft production. According to a recent estimate the
economy grew at 1.9 percent a year throughout the 18th century.30 Textile
output grew 250 percent, coal output seven or eightfold, and iron output from
40,000 tons to 140,000 tons. By 1789 a fifth of France’s population were
employed in industry or handicrafts.31
The moneyed class of big merchants (especially in the Atlantic ports
connected to the West Indian sugar colonies), ‘putters out’ and, occasionally,
manufacturers (like the handful of monopolists who controlled the printing
industry) grew in size and wealth. The rich bourgeoisie were in an anomalous
position. In formal, legal terms they were inferior to any members of the
nobility. But often they were richer and able to exercise considerable influence
over the monarchy. What is more, they could buy up land which gave them
feudal dues from the peasantry and could profit from acting as tax ‘farmers’ for
the monarchy. Beneath them the lower bourgeoisie were completely excluded
from influence. But they, too, often channelled money their families had
obtained through trading, shopkeeping or luxury crafts into investments in land
or into the purchase of certain legal offices. Both groups of the bourgeoisie
resented the discrimination against them by the aristocracy, but they by no
means stood in automatic revolutionary opposition to the absolutist monarchy.
Indeed, they could still look to the monarchy to protect them from the
aristocracy.
Wedged between the bourgeoisie and the urban poor were a mass of small
tradespeople and artisans. Traditionally they had relied on state sponsored
guilds to regulate prices and protect their incomes. But the spread of the market
made this a less and less effective way of providing them with security. A
sudden change in market conditions might deprive them of an income, while the
increase in the price of bread after harvest failures—as in the late 1780s and
again in the early 1790s—might drive them close to starvation. What is more, a
growing portion of the artisan and small trading workforce was made up of
journeymen—employees—who could never expect to own their own
businesses. These had little in common with those artisans and traders who
remained conservative and guild-minded.
There were also a growing number of ‘men on the make’—people
prepared to look for any opportunity to get ahead: a lucrative trading deal, a
financial reward for some political service, or the pioneering of a new
productive technique. But although such people could resent the ‘irrationality’
of the old order—they often devoured popular forms of Enlightenment thinking
—they were not revolutionaries.
The peasantry made up the bulk of French society. It varied enormously
from region to region. In a few areas it had undergone changes similar to those
in England, with the emergence of capitalist farmers employing innovative
techniques. There were a rather larger number of peasants whose production
was oriented to the market (through the cultivation of vines or a combination of
spinning or weaving with farming), but with holdings that remained small.
Then there were vast numbers who leased land from or shared their crop with
landowners, leaving them with no funds for agricultural improvement even if
some were able to employ a limited number of labourers. Finally, there were
many whose condition, apart from the absence of formal serfdom, hardly
differed from medieval times. Yet almost all of the peasantry had certain
features in common. They felt the land was really their own, yet had to pay
feudal dues to landowners, tithes that could amount to 9 percent of the crop to
the church, and, usually, rent on top. What is more, they had to pay high taxes
from which the nobility and the clergy were exempt. This burden meant they
suffered terribly if their crops failed or the prices of things they had to buy
rose.
The complex interrelation between the monarchy, the aristocracy, the
different groups of the bourgeoisie and the various sections of the peasantry
has led some ‘revisionist’ historians to claim the revolution cannot be
explained in class terms.32 The bourgeoisie, they say, was more likely to
obtain its income from legal offices, landownership or even feudal dues than it
was from modern industry. Therefore, it could not have been a class standing
for a new, capitalist way of producing in opposition to a nobility and monarchy
based on feudalism. These historians argue that their case is confirmed by the
small number of big industrialists involved on the revolutionary side and the
considerable number of merchants who took the side of the king.
Some of their factual claims are undoubtedly true. The bourgeoisie as a
class certainly did not stand in unremitting revolutionary opposition to the old
order. It had grown up within this order over hundreds of years and was tied to
it, both ideologically and financially, in innumerable ways. The leading
revolutionary figures were not financiers or industrial capitalists but lawyers
like Danton and Robespierre, journalists like Desmoulins, and even, in the
case of Marat, a former doctor to the upper classes. But the conclusions drawn
by the revisionists are fundamentally false. The intertwining of the interests of
the nobility and the bourgeoisie did not stop them being attracted towards
opposite visions of French society. One looked back to the past, to the defence
of aristocratic privilege and feudal dues against all change. The other looked
towards a society built around the formal equality of the marketplace, where
ancestry alone could not hold back the ‘man on the make’. The mass of the
bourgeoisie repeatedly hesitated in face of the measures needed to advance
that model of society. But they certainly did not go into exile in disgust when it
triumphed, as did much of the aristocracy.
The division of society around these rival poles was not, in the first place,
brought about by the bourgeoisie, but by the aristocratic reaction. As with the
English and American revolutions, it was not the mass of people demanding
something new which produced the initial upheaval, but the attempt of the old
order to push things backward.
Money had become the central preoccupation of the French monarchy in
the 1780s. It had spent enormous sums on the Seven Years War with Britain
and Prussia, and more again during the American war with Britain. Bankruptcy
threatened if it did not find ways to increase its tax revenue. But it found this
almost impossible. The exemption of the nobles and clergy from taxation meant
the burden fell on the lower classes, and the point had been reached where
most of them simply could not pay more. Average living standards in the
countryside were falling, while wages in the towns had risen by only 22
percent against price rises of 65 percent.33 What is more, the method of raising
tax was hopelessly inefficient, with considerable sums being siphoned off by
the ‘tax farmers’ who collected it.
The king was briefly brought to see how serious the situation had become.
He appointed a ‘reforming’ ministry in 1786 which presented a plan to
rationalise the tax system and extend it to the huge landholdings of the nobility
and the church. The aristocracy were outraged. An assembly of ‘notables’
picked by the king rejected the proposals. When further reforms were brought
forward, the noblesse de robe in the provincial parlements refused to
implement them—and when the ministers tried to proceed in spite of them, they
organised public protests which turned into riots in some places. In these
protests, the nobility still found it possible to win the support of many members
of other classes. After all, the talk of higher taxes could seem like a threat to
some members of the bourgeoisie and peasantry.
The nobility, seeing themselves as the natural leaders of society, had the
illusion that they could use popular support to bend the government to their
will. Their central demand was for an Estates-General—an assembly which
had last been convened in 1614. In agreeing to this in May 1789, the king was
conceding to the reactionary demands of the aristocracy, not some progressive
movement of the bourgeoisie or the lower classes.
Yet this concession to the aristocracy forced the other classes to organise.
They were required to choose representatives of the ‘third estate’. In the towns
this meant assemblies to choose ‘electors’ who in turn would vote for
delegates. In the countryside it meant villagers deciding who to send to an area
meeting which would take decisions. The mass of people had no experience of
such things and usually put their trust in those best able to speak. The result
was that the assembly of the third estate was dominated by lawyers and other
well heeled members of the middle class. But the process of choosing
delegates encouraged many millions of people to think for the first time about
what they wanted from society. In villages and towns across France they drew
up doléances—lists of demands they wanted the Estates-General to
implement. The discussion led to the activist groups beginning to crystallise in
the poorer quarters of Paris, which were to storm the Bastille in July and
march on Versailles in October. It also encouraged ferment among the peasants,
which boiled over into revolt against local nobles in the summer of 1789.
The reactionary offensive of the aristocracy roused the middle class and
created the mood of self assertion among its representatives as the Estates-
General assembled. They were not revolutionary in intent. They were still
enamoured with the monarchy and, rather than abolish it, wanted to cut the
aristocracy down to size, so that there would be an end to arbitrary privilege
and bullying. But they were not prepared to be dictated to, and they felt
emboldened by the ferment in society. Hence their defiant gestures—their
assertion of ‘human rights’, and declarations about the end of feudalism—
could be followed by a compromise which left the king with considerable
power and the aristocracy with their property.
But the aristocratic reaction was not going to be brought to an end so
quickly. So long as the aristocrats were in control of their fortunes, their
country estates and the officer corps of the army, they were going to try to re-
establish their old positions of privilege.
Reformers, revolutionaries and sans-culottes
The popular movements which had backed the middle class assembly in the
summer of 1789 had roused the lower classes to challenge their miserable lot
for the first time. They had begun to see that the wealth of the few and the
poverty of the many were two sides of the same coin. At first they identified
wealth with the aristocracy. But it was not long before they were turning their
attention to those sections of the bourgeoisie who aped the aristocracy or who
enriched themselves as ‘tax farmers’, landowners and speculators.
The agitation of 1789 had thrown up many thousands of new political
activists among the middle classes. It was they who attended the political
clubs, read the mass of pamphlets and newspapers, and took part in electoral
meetings. They were exultant at first. It seemed that history was offering them a
chance to realise the dreams of the Enlightenment, to right the wrongs
castigated by Voltaire, to introduce the society imagined by Rousseau. They
adopted heroic postures, imagining themselves as reincarnations of figures
from ancient Rome like Brutus.
But they were in danger of being trapped between aristocratic reaction on
the one side and the popular ferment on the other. For although 1789 had shown
that popular unrest could defeat the aristocracy, peasants burning landowners’
title deeds did not stop if the landowners were from the bourgeoisie, and
townspeople did not stop attacking food speculators who had bourgeois
credentials.
It was this which led to the repeated splits within the ranks of the middle
class political activists. Typically, the majority opted for security, property and
conciliation of the monarchy and aristocracy. Only a radical minority were
prepared to risk rousing the masses. But then reaction, emboldened by the
concessions made to it, would make moves which threatened the majority and
they would swing behind the radicals—although with a section splitting away
to join the counter-revolution.
This was what happened in 1791 and 1792. It was to happen again in
1793.
The crisis of 1792, which culminated in the proclamation of the republic
and the execution of the king, had involved the overthrow of Lafayette by the
Jacobins and the Parisian masses organised through the sections. The
Girondins had gone along with this action, but were still reluctant to go further
and agree to the execution of the king. They feared ‘the mob’—the ‘hydra of
anarchy’ as Brissot called it.34 Against a background of growing hunger in
town and countryside alike, they resisted demands from the Parisian sections
to control prices, to requisition grain supplies to feed people and to take
exemplary action against ‘hoarders and speculators’.
Instead they attacked the masses in much the same way as the previous
government. ‘Your property is threatened’, one of their leaders warned the
wealthy bourgeoisie in April, ‘and you are closing your eyes to the danger…
Chase these venomous creatures back to their lairs’.35 The Convention voted
overwhelmingly to send Marat before the revolutionary tribunal on a charge of
subversion, only to see him acquitted. Hébert was arrested and the president of
the Convention declared—in language similar to the notorious statement of the
Duke of Brunswick—that unless ‘recurrent insurrections’ in the city stopped,
‘Paris would be destroyed’.36 The army suffered a new series of defeats as its
commander, Dumouriez, deserted to the enemy. Disaffected peasants in the
Vendée region in the west of France joined a bloody monarchist rising.
Finally, on 29 May ‘moderates’ and royalists together seized control of
Lyons and imprisoned the Jacobin mayor, Chalier, before executing him in July.
Robespierre’s Jacobins were as middle class as the Girondins, although
many historians argue they came mostly from a lower layer of the middle class.
They were just as devoted to the ‘rights’ of property, as they repeatedly
declared in their public statements. Robespierre was personally incorruptible,
but many of his supporters had no compunction about trying to benefit
financially from the revolution—after all, they were members of, or aspirants
to, the bourgeoisie. Danton had personally enriched himself, at one point
accepting money from the king. Marat and Hébert did agitate among the
Parisian masses—but from the point of view of those who were small artisan
or traders, with no objection to profit.
But in the early summer of 1793 they could see that the alternative to the
revolution going forward was a carnival of reaction which neither they nor the
gains of the previous four years would survive. They could also see the only
way to push the revolution forward was to ally with the Parisian masses once
more and make concessions to the peasantry, even if that meant taking measures
which clashed with bourgeois interests. Robespierre wrote in his diary, ‘The
dangers come from the middle classes, and to defeat them we must rally the
people’.37 In other words, the radical bourgeoisie in the Jacobin club had to
unite with the revolutionary sans-culottes of the Parisian sections against the
moderate Girondin bourgeoisie. The revolution’s third great turning point had
arrived.
On 26 May 1793 Robespierre issued a call for the people to revolt. On 29
May, 33 of the Parisian sections met together and chose an insurrectionary
committee of nine members to organise a journée—a new uprising. On 31 May
and 2 June the ringing of the tocsin (alarm) bell and the firing of cannon
summoned the masses onto the streets. They surrounded the convention with
80,000 armed people and compelled it to issue orders for the arrest of 29
Girondin deputies. The Parisian sections were now the centre of power in the
capital and the Jacobin leadership was, in effect, the government of France.
The defeated Girondins fled the city to stir up revolt in the provinces. They
had friends in the officer corps of the army, allies among the big merchants,
sympathy from middle class landowners afraid of the rural revolt, the
allegiance of all those who saw any ‘mob’ as a threat—and, of course, support
from an aristocracy which would rejoice in a victory against the revolution.
Within weeks, much of the south and west of the country was in Girondin
hands. The Vendée was held by royalists, the anti-Jacobins had handed the
southern port of Toulon and ships of the Mediterranean navy over to the
British, and foreign armies were still marching towards Paris. The counter-
revolution had even shown it could strike in the capital when a young woman
from the Girondin town of Caen, Charlotte Corday, gained access to Marat by
claiming she needed his help, and stabbed him to death as he sat in his bath.
The Parisian sans-culottes masses urged the Jacobin leaders to take
further revolutionary measures to stop the rot, and that leadership soon saw it
had no choice. A Committee of Public Safety—which reported at least once a
week to the convention and was subject to reelection each month—was
empowered to take whatever emergency measures were appropriate. A ‘law of
the maximum’ imposed price controls on bread and speculation in people’s
hunger became a capital crime. There was a forced loan on the rich to pay for
the war and a progressive tax, starting at 10 percent and rising to 50 percent,
on all income over the minimum needed to keep a family.38 The economy
became increasingly subject to central direction, with an important
nationalised sector producing war supplies. The land seized from émigrés and
the church was divided into small plots to placate peasant anger. The volunteer
revolutionary units and the old army units were merged at the front, so that the
volunteers could enthuse the regulars while learning military skills from them,
and they jointly elected their officers. Suspect officials were purged from
government departments. Revolutionary commissioners were sent with full
power to put down the counter-revolutionary risings in the countryside. All
single men between the ages of 18 and 25 were required to do military service,
without the old exemptions which allowed the well-to-do to pay substitutes to
take their place. Finally, after further journées in September, the convention
and the Committee of Public Safety agreed to a policy of severe repression—
terror.
The Jacobins and the terror
The impetus for the terror came from below—from people who had suffered
under the old regime, who knew they would suffer even more if it came back
and whose friends and relatives were already dying daily at the front as a
result of betrayal and corrupt profiteering. It combined the emotional desire for
vengeance with the rational understanding that, under conditions of civil war,
opponents of the revolutionary regime would seize every opportunity to do it
damage. Prison would not deter them, since they would expect to be released
once their plots were successful. People like Hébert on the ‘terrorist’ fringe of
the Jacobins fanned these feelings. But the main Jacobin leaders were slow to
embrace the call. Far from being the ‘callous butcher’ of legend, Robespierre
had been almost alone in calling for the abolition of the death penalty in the
early days of the revolution. By contrast, the Girondins supported its use for
ordinary ‘criminals’ from the lower classes but had qualms when it came to the
king.
Only 66, or one quarter, of the 260 people brought before the revolutionary
tribunal before September 1793 had been condemned to death. From October
the pace accelerated. The execution of the queen, Marie Antoinette, was
followed by the condemnation of the Girondins and the Duke of Orleans (who
had tried to advance his own cause by parading as a Jacobin). In the last three
months of 1793, 177 out of 395 defendants were sentenced to death, and by
December the number of people in Paris prisons had risen to 4,525—from
1,500 in August. Nevertheless, the number of executions at this stage was much
smaller than might be believed from popular accounts in novels and films
which suggest scores going to the guillotine every day.
The 200 year litany of complaints about the executions of aristocrats and
royalists must be put in perspective. Executions had been a continual
occurrence under the old regime. Poor people could be hanged for stealing a
piece of cloth. As Mark Twain once put it, ‘There were two reigns of terror:
one lasted several months, the other 1,000 years.’ The army marching towards
Paris from the north would have installed its own terror, much greater than that
of the Jacobins, if it had been able to take the city, and it would have used the
royalists and aristocrats to point out ‘ring leaders’ for instant execution. The
‘moderates’ and royalists who took over Lyons, Marseilles and Toulon
established tribunals that ‘ordered patriots guillotined or hanged’. The results
‘were piteous’39—the death toll in Lyons was said to be 800.40 In the Vendée a
royalist priest reported that ‘each day was marked by bloody expeditions’
against republican sympathisers. Even to have attended a mass presided over
by one of the clergy who accepted the republic was grounds ‘to be imprisoned
and then murdered or shot under the pretext that the prisons were too full’.41 At
Machecoul 524 republicans were shot.42 On top of this, there was the
enormous death toll in the battles on France’s northern borders, in a war begun
by the monarchists and Girondins and joined with enthusiasm by all enemies of
the revolution, at home and abroad—a war in which French officers
sympathetic to the other side might deliberately send thousands of soldiers to
their deaths.
The victims of the counter-revolution and the war do not figure in the
horror stories about the revolution retailed by popular novelists, or even in
Charles Dickens’s A Tale of Two Cities. For such writers, the death of a
respectable gentleman or lady is a tragedy, that of a republican artisan or
seamstress of no concern.
This was essentially the argument Robespierre put to the convention in late
September 1793. He was justifying punitive measures against one of the
republic’s generals, Houchard, for retreating unnecessarily and causing a
military disaster. ‘In two years 100,000 men have been butchered because of
treason and weakness,’ he said. ‘It is weakness for traitors which is destroying
us’.43 It was an argument which won over many of the deputies who vacillated
over whether to back Jacobin measures.
The worst bloodshed during the revolution did not take place in Paris,
where the revolutionaries never lost control, but in fighting to reconquer
regions held by its opponents. There were a handful of cases where the
republican armies took bloody revenge: in Lyons a revolutionary commission
passed 1,667 death sentences; in the Vendée rebels taken prisoner carrying
weapons were summarily executed; in Nantes 2,000 to 3,000 supporters of the
revolt were executed by drowning in the River Loire; in Toulon there were
mass executions of those blamed for handing the city to the British.44
There is another aspect of the terror which has to be examined. This is the
terror which the revolutionary leaders directed at each other in the course of
1793-94. It began with the antagonism between the Girondins and the Jacobins.
The Girondins had shown in the charges they had laid against Marat their own
willingness to resort to repression. Nevertheless, the first Girondin leaders
arrested after the establishment of the Jacobin government had simply been
placed under house arrest. By then leaving Paris to stir revolt in the provinces,
they proved this was a disagreement which could not be settled by words
alone. Robespierre and Danton came to feel that any Girondin left free would
behave in the same way. Vigorous repression—and in conditions of civil war,
that meant execution—was the only way to prevent them doing so.
But for the middle class Jacobins, the same logic which applied to the
Girondins applied, in conditions of civil war, to certain other republicans. As
far as Robespierre was concerned his own allies, the sans-culottes of Paris,
were beginning to become a problem. They had done wonders in providing
mass support for the revolution in the streets. But they were also antagonising
the very social group from which Robespierre and other Jacobin leaders came
—those people of property wavering over whether to fight for the republic. At
the very moment he was adopting the sans-culottes’ call for terror,
Robespierre began a crackdown on sans-culottes organisations—in mid-
September Jacques Roux was arrested; in October Claire Lacombe’s Society
of Revolutionary Republican Women was dissolved; and finally, in March,
Hébert and several others were guillotined.
The ‘extremists’ who put forward demands that could only frighten the
respectable, propertied middle class were not Robespierre’s only problem. He
also feared the revolution could be destroyed by those who put personal
interests and inclinations above the needs of the moment. This applied
especially to some of the circle around Danton—a man capable of enormous
revolutionary courage and enthusiasm, but also very attracted by the rewards
available from mixing with dubious wealthy figures. It was no coincidence that
his friends were involved in a major corruption case concerning the French
East India Company. When Danton began to draw around him an informal
‘indulgent’ faction in January and February 1794, Robespierre began to fear he
was following the path taken by the Girondins nine months earlier. Five days
after the execution of Hébert, it was the turn of Danton, Desmoulins and others
to be arrested, brought before the tribunal and executed.
Robespierre and his close allies felt beleaguered. Their own class was
half attracted to the forces of counter-revolution. A class based on profit
making, its members were continually subject to the temptation of bribery and
corruption. Only fear of drastic measures could keep the middle class on the
path to victory. Robespierre believed he stood for a new form of society in
which the essential values of the middle class would be realised. He gave
expression to this feeling by identifying his goal as ‘virtue’. But he could not
achieve this without disciplining the middle class itself, and sometimes very
harshly. As he put it in February 1794, ‘Without virtue terror is useless;
without terror, virtue is powerless.’
What is more, the terror made the state the focus for revolutionary feeling
and action. It served to divert the sans-culottes masses away from a path full
of danger for the middle class—the path of increasingly taking direction of the
revolution into lower class hands. It was much better for the middle class
politicians if the sans-culottes were dancing the Carmargnole while watching
the state’s guillotine at work than if they were arguing and acting on their own
behalf. The terror came to function not only to defend the revolution, but also
to symbolise the way in which the state was being centralised by a political
group balancing between the masses and the conciliatory elements in the
bourgeoisie.
By the spring of 1794 the Jacobins around Robespierre ruled alone,
winding down the popular organisations in Paris—purging the commune,
dissolving the sections, abolishing the commissioners who investigated food
hoarding. Government power was centralised as never before in the hands of
an apparently unified group of men, no longer beset by factions to the left and
right. But such a centralised power could only get its way by resorting more
than ever to repression. As Soboul explains:
Hitherto the terror…had been directed against the enemies of the revolution.
But now it was extended to include those who opposed the government
committees. In this way the committees used the terror to tighten their grip on
political life.45
The centralisation of the terror created a momentum of its own. The
Jacobin core began to feel anyone not with them must be against them—and the
feeling was, in part, justified. There was growing antagonism towards them
among their own middle class as it chafed at the restraints on its freedoms, and
there was antagonism from many of the sans-culottes followers of Roux and
Hébert. Dealing with such antagonism by terror only served to increase the
isolation of the Jacobin core still further. But calling off the terror threatened to
give a free hand to those who wanted vengeance on the Jacobin core.
Robespierre vacillated over what to do. He tried to hold the terror in
check in certain provinces—for instance, by recalling to Paris the man who
had been responsible for the mass drownings in Nantes. But then he allowed
the terror in Paris to escalate massively in May 1794, so that the next three
months saw as many executions as the preceding year. For the first time, the
accused were denied the right to a defence, juries could convict on nothing
more than ‘moral guilt’, and people who might have no connection with one
another were tried in groups on the grounds that they might have ‘conspired’ in
the prisons. It was at this time that the great pamphleteer of the American
Revolution and of British plebeian radicalism, Tom Paine, only narrowly
avoided execution—his crime being that he was a ‘foreigner’ who had been
friendly with some of the Girondins (as, of course, had most of the Jacobin
leadership at some point in the past).
Thermidor and after
Jacobin methods succeeded as the Girondin ones had not in defending the
revolutionary regime. By the summer of 1794 the revolutionary army was
showing itself to be probably the best fighting force Europe had ever seen. The
revolts in the provinces had been smashed, the French army was in occupation
of Brussels and moving northwards, and the republic did indeed seem ‘one and
indivisible’.
Yet these very successes created an insuperable problem for the Jacobins.
They had been able to raise themselves up by balancing between left and right
—and in the process take very harsh measures against sections of their own
class—because large sections of the middle class had seen no alternative a
few months before. This was why, month after month, the convention had voted
to renew the powers of the Committee of Public Safety. But the victories led to
a growing feeling that dictatorial rule was no longer necessary.
Robespierre had made many enemies in the previous months—‘indulgent’
sympathisers of Danton, emissaries who had been recalled from the provinces
for carrying repression too far, former allies of Hébert, and those who had
never really broken with the Girondins but were afraid to say so. On 27 July
1794 they united to ambush Robespierre in the midst of a debate in the
Convention. A delegate moved that an arrest warrant be issued against him and
his close allies, and the Convention voted unanimously in favour.
The Jacobins made a last attempt to save themselves by calling on the
masses to rise in a revolutionary journée. But they themselves had dissolved
the committees and banned the sans-culottes papers that could organise such a
rising. They had lifted the ban on speculation in food and, only four days
before, had published maximum wage rates which meant a cut in earnings for
many artisans. Only 16 of the 48 sections of Paris sent forces to join the
attempted rising, and they were left standing around for hours without proper
leadership before dispersing. Robespierre and 21 of his allies were executed
on 28 July, followed by another 71 men the next day—the largest mass
execution in the history of the revolution.
Robespierre had shouted out in the convention, ‘The republic is a lost
cause. The brigands are now triumphant.’ He was right in the sense that the
great movement of the last five years had come to an end. Thermidor, the name
of the month in which Robespierre was overthrown in the republic’s
revolutionary calendar, has ever since signified internal counter-revolution.
The allies who had overthrown him did not stay long in power. The months
which followed saw those who hated the revolution gain a new confidence.
Groups of rich young thugs, the jeunesse dorée (golden youth) began to take
over the streets of Paris, attacking anyone who tried to defend the
revolutionary ideals or who showed lack of respect for their ‘betters’. A mob
of them forced the Jacobin club to close. A constitutional amendment brought
in a new property qualification for the vote. A ‘white terror’ led to a wave of
executions of former revolutionaries and the victimisation of very many others.
Two brief sans-culottes risings in April and May 1795 showed that the poor,
given a chance, were more than a match for the jeunesse dorée, but they were
crushed by forces loyal to the Thermidorians. Émigrés began to return to the
country and boast that the monarchy would soon be back. The pretender to the
throne, the future Louis XVIII, insisted from exile that he wanted to bring back
the old regime, complete with its three estates, and punish all those who had
taken part in the revolution, including the Thermidorians. Then in October
1795 the royalists staged a rising of their own in Paris. The Thermidorians,
terrified, began rearming Jacobins and calling on sans-culottes for help before
the army—especially a rising officer, a one-time Jacobin called Napoleon
Bonaparte—came to their assistance. Fearful of a full-blooded monarchic
restoration, the Thermidorians agreed to concentrate power in the hands of a
Directory of five men. For four years the Directory was pulled first in one
direction then in another, all the time allowing more power to accede to
Napoleon, whose base in the army provided a bastion against both the royalists
and any rebirth of popular Jacobinism, until in 1799 Napoleon staged a coup
which in effect gave him dictatorial power. In 1804 he had the pope crown him
emperor, ruling with the support both of some former Jacobins and some of the
aristocrats who had returned from exile. Finally, in 1814 and 1815, defeat for
his armies allowed the other European powers to reinstitute the Bourbon
monarchy. Robespierre’s final, desperate warning seemed vindicated.
Yet in two respects he was wrong. The revolution was over after
Thermidor 1794, but many of the changes it had brought remained. Napoleon’s
regime was built on consolidation of many of these changes: the ending of
feudal dues; the creation of an independent peasantry; the ending of internal
customs posts; the creation of a uniform national administration; above all, the
determination of government policy in the light of bourgeois goals rather than
dynastic or aristocratic ones. Napoleon’s army could conquer much of Europe
for a period precisely because it was not the army of the old regime. It was an
army organised and motivated in ways established during the revolution,
particularly its Jacobin phase. Its best generals were men who had risen
through the ranks on merit in the revolutionary period—Napoleon even relied
on a former Jacobin ‘terrorist’ to run his police.
Like the Dutch, English and American revolutions before it, the French
Revolution had cut away the great obstacles inherited from the past to a fully
market based society. And after the events of 1792-94 there was now no way
aristocratic reaction could reimpose them.
Looking back on the revolution 20 years later, the novelist Stendhal
observed, ‘In 2,000 years of world history, so sharp a revolution in customs,
ideas, and beliefs has perhaps never happened before’.46 The revolutionaries
may have been defeated, but much of the revolution’s heritage survived to
shape the modern world.
Robespierre was wrong in a second way as well. That was because the
revolution did not just consist of the rise of middle class political groups, each
one more radical than the one before. Centrally, it also involved the entry into
political life of millions of people in the town and country who had never
before had a chance to shape history. They had learned to fight for their own
interests and to argue with each other over what those interests were. The
peasants who had burned down the chateaux of the aristocrats in 1789 and
1792 were not going to let a subsequent government take their land from them.
In Paris and other cities the lower classes had risen to fight for their own
interests on a scale never before seen in history—and would do so again in
1830, 1848 and 1871, as well as in 1936 and 1968.
Accounts of the revolution which look, quite rightly, at its overall impact
on world history are always in danger of understating what happened on the
ground, in the narrow streets and overcrowded dwellings of the poorer parts of
Paris. It was here that people read and argued over the writings of Marat and
Hébert, spent hour after hour at their section ‘meeting in permanence’, hunted
out hoarders of grain and searched for monarchist agents, sharpened pikes and
marched on the Bastille, organised the risings that replaced the constitutional
monarchists by the Girondins and the Girondins by the Jacobins, and
volunteered in their thousands to go to the front or to spread the revolution
through the countryside.
There were limitations to the popular movements in the cities. They arose
from the structures of French society at the time. The great majority of the
urban masses still worked in small workshops, where the master and his
family would work alongside perhaps a couple of employees whose living
standards did not differ markedly from their own. They could come together on
the streets or in section assemblies and clubs. But they were not tied to one
another organically in the process of production which took up much of their
time. Their ideal was the preservation of the individual family unit, with the
father in charge, not the collective reorganisation of society. They could rise up
against the aristocrats who had humiliated them in the past and the speculators
who would see them starve, showing enormous courage and inventiveness, as
histories of the revolution by Kropotkin and Guerin47 have shown. And when
they rose up they could begin to throw off many of their own prejudices, as
shown by the vanguard role played by women in many of the protests, by the
call from some of the revolutionaries for women to be able to vote, and by the
emergence of revolutionary women’s clubs. Yet in the great crisis of the
revolution in 1793-94 they found it difficult to put forward a programme of
their own which could lead to victory.
As Albert Soboul has shown, their condition of life meant they could push
the Jacobins to take necessary radical measures, but they could not frame a
collective, class response of their own which could solve the revolution’s
problems. They could fight for maximum prices, but they were not in a position
to take over the decisive productive processes. Even their keenness for terror
was a sign of their weakness. They had to focus attention on stopping other
people sabotaging the revolution because they could not take direct, collective
control over its destiny themselves.
Yet it was their action and initiative, as much as the inspiring words of
Danton or the steely determination of Robespierre, which overturned the old
order in France—inspiring or terrifying all of Europe and beyond for much of
the next century. From them also emerged, in the aftermath of the crushing of
the popular movement, a group of revolutionaries around ‘Gracchus’ Babeuf
(executed in 1796) whose stress on social and economic equality helped lay
the ground for the socialist movements of the 19th and 20th centuries.
Chapter 3
Jacobinism outside France
‘Succour to all peoples who want to recover their liberty’ was the promise
held out by the Girondin-led convention of 1792. The war which Brissot
proclaimed against the monarchs of Europe was not going to be an old-style
war of conquest, he claimed, but a war of liberation. There were certainly
many people outside France prepared to rejoice at any revolutionary advance:
This was a glorious mental dawn. All thinking beings shared in the jubilation
of this epoch. Emotions of a lofty character stirred men’s minds…a spiritual
enthusiasm thrilled through the world.48
So the ageing German philosopher Hegel described the impact of the
events in France on the world of his youth. His memory was not playing tricks
on him. The message of revolution found an echo everywhere the
Enlightenment had influenced people.
The English poets Wordsworth, Southey and Coleridge enthused about the
storming of the Bastille. ‘From the general heart of human kind, Hope springs
forth like a full-born Deity’, Coleridge wrote. The poet-engraver William
Blake was almost arrested for defending the revolution’s principles in an
argument with a soldier. The house of the pioneering chemist Joseph Priestley
was attacked by a royalist mob. The German philosophers Kant and Fichte
were as enthusiastic as the young Hegel. Even after Thermidor, Kant could say,
‘The misdeeds of the Jacobins were nothing compared to the tyrants of past
time’.49 Beethoven incorporated the melodies of revolutionary songs into his
music and embodied the spirit of the revolutionary army in his great third
symphony, the Eroica (although he removed the dedication to Napoleon in
disgust after he proclaimed himself emperor). From Ireland, Wolfe Tone of the
Belfast middle class and Lord Edward Fitzgerald, a member of an old
aristocratic family, went to Paris to make contact with the revolutionary
government. In Latin America a 16 year old from Caracas, Simon Bolivar, also
from an aristocratic family, defended the revolution in an argument with the
Spanish viceroy in Panama in 1799; while a Mexican priest, Miguel Hidalgo,
won students such as Jose Maria Morelos to the ideals of the revolution.
Revolution at bayonet point
Such enthusiasm meant advancing French armies found many local allies, at
first, as they crossed the borders into Belgium, Holland, northern Italy and
southern Germany. Middle class opponents of monarchist or oligarchic
governments described themselves as ‘Jacobins’—and even after the Jacobins
had fallen from power this remained the general name for supporters of the
revolutionary forces. Whenever the French army advanced, these forces would
work with it to carry through from above reforms similar to those enforced,
from below, in France—abolition of serfdom and feudal dues, separation of
church and state, confiscation of church lands, abolition of internal customs
posts, and the establishment of more or less democratic assemblies. But
problems soon began to arise.
One of Robespierre’s arguments against Brissot had been that the peoples
of other countries would not welcome foreign invaders, however well
intentioned. He was soon to be proved right, despite the initial enthusiasm of
many intellectuals and some sections of the middle class. The victorious
French army could only maintain itself by pillage and by imposing tribute on
countries it conquered. What began as a war of liberation passed through a
bitter period as a war of revolutionary defence, and ended up as a war of
imperial conquest. Napoleon carried the process to its logical conclusion by
annexing Belgium, Savoy and German statelets south of the Rhine, replacing
democratic assemblies by monarchies and installing his brothers as kings in
Italy, Westphalia, Holland and Spain.
Even under Napoleon the French army bulldozed away the remnants of
feudalism and, in some cases at least, prepared the ground for the advance of
capitalist production. But, without the sans-culottes and peasant risings that
had been so important in France, its local allies lacked any base among the
mass of people. The peasants and urban lower classes gained nothing from the
French occupation to make them identify with the new order, since tribute paid
to France and the costs of providing for the French army constituted a burden
as great as the old feudal payments. The local ‘Jacobins’ were left high and dry
whenever the French army was forced to withdraw.
This happened everywhere in 1812-14. Napoleon over-extended his
empire on two fronts, by trying to place his brother on the Spanish throne and
by marching across the north European plain to Moscow. It was a disastrous
strategy. His troops managed to put down a popular uprising in Madrid, but
from then on were harassed by guerilla fighters as British troops led by
Wellington fought their way across the Iberian Peninsula. Meanwhile, the
occupation of a deserted Moscow turned into a disaster as enemy troops and
harsh winter conditions destroyed his 1,000 mile supply lines. So unpopular
were the French armies in the occupied territories that Spanish and Prussian
liberals allied themselves with monarchist forces to drive them out in what
seemed like wars of ‘national liberation’—only to find themselves betrayed by
victorious kings and driven down into the depths of oppression and depression
expressed in the paintings of Goya’s ‘dark period’.
Napoleon’s defeat (or rather his two defeats, since he staged an amazing
100 day comeback in 1815 before being defeated at Waterloo) allowed all the
kings, princes and aristocrats to return in style, creating a weird half-world in
which the old superstructures of the 18th century ancien régimes were
imposed on social structures which had been transformed—at least in France,
northern Italy and western Germany. This is the world brilliantly portrayed in
the novels The Red and the Black and The Charterhouse of Parma by
Stendhal (a former commissary in Napoleon’s army), as well as The Count of
Monte Cristo by Alexander Dumas (whose father, the son of a black slave, had
been a general under Napoleon).
Britain: the birth of a tradition
It was not only in continental Europe that the revolution had a profound impact
on political life. It had a mighty influence in Britain. The most important
sections of the bourgeoisie had obtained a significant influence over political
affairs before 1789 and saw no reason to play with revolution. But the French
events stirred wide sections of the masses in the rapidly expanding cities and
towns—the ever increasing numbers of craftspeople, journeymen and small
shopkeepers, and along with them, some of the new industrial workers of the
factories.
Tom Paine’s two part defence of the revolution and call for similar
constitutional principles in Britain, The Rights of Man, sold 100,000 copies.
In Sheffield at the end of 1791, ‘five or six mechanics…conversing about the
enormous high price of provisions’ and abuses in government, formed the
Sheffield Constitutional Society, dedicated to universal suffrage and annual
parliaments. By March 1792 it was 2,000 strong and organised a street
celebration involving up to 6,000 after the revolutionary victory at Valmy in
the autumn.50 Similar societies were launched in Manchester, Stockport,
Birmingham, Coventry and Norwich, with varying degrees of success.51 The
London Corresponding Society, founded by shoemaker Thomas Hardy at the
beginning of 1792, mushroomed until it had 5,000 members organised in 48
‘divisions’ (branches)52 and was establishing a national network with the
provincial societies.
The movement was big enough to worry the British government as it
prepared for war against the French Revolution at the end of 1792. Local
bigwigs in Birmingham had already incited a mob to attack a dinner of local
reformers commemorating the fall of the Bastille in 1791, sacking houses,
burning down meeting places and driving people like the chemist Joseph
Priestley from the city.53 Now the government encouraged the anti-Jacobin
agitation nationally. Loyalist societies were set up in each locality to whip up a
nationalist war fever.
There was also a vicious crackdown against any attempt to propagandise
democratic ideas. Tom Paine, charged with treason for The Rights of Man,
was forced to flee the country. Two leaders of the Scottish Friends of the
People, the young lawyer Thomas Muir and the English Unitarian preacher
Thomas Palmer, were sentenced to transportation after a notoriously biased
trial,54 as were three delegates to a ‘Scottish constitutional convention’.
Thomas Hardy and a dozen other London leaders were put on trial for treason
and Hardy’s wife died as a mob attacked their home. When a sympathetic jury
acquitted the defendants, parliament suspended habeas corpus so that activists
could be imprisoned without facing a jury.
At certain points the agitation of the English and Scottish Jacobins met
with a wide response among the urban classes. They could gather thousands to
open air meetings, and some of the leaders of the great naval mutinies which
shook the British navy in 1797 were clearly under the influence of their ideas.
But the mass of the middle class were prepared to unite with the landowning
class in defence of the profitable status quo, giving the government a free hand
to crush the movement. By the late 1790s it was very difficult for anyone to
express sympathy for revolutionary ideals.
Yet the agitation of the Sheffield Constitutional Society, the London
Corresponding Society, the Scottish Friends of the People and others did have
one important effect. As Edward Thompson showed in his The Making of the
English Working Class, it helped create a tradition that was to have great
effect in the years 1815-48.
Ireland’s Republican rising
The example of France had an even greater direct impact in Ireland, Britain’s
oldest colony, giving birth to a revolutionary nationalist tradition that persists
today.
English governments had consolidated their hold over the island after
smashing resistance in the 1650s by settling Protestant peasants (mainly from
Scotland) on land taken from native Catholics in the province of Ulster. The
descendants of these peasant settlers lived in fear of being driven from the land
by a Catholic rising, leading them to feel a community of interest with the great
Anglo-Irish landowners, who were also Protestants. They were frightened to
challenge the policies imposed on them by British governments in case it
encouraged the dispossessed Catholics. The Protestant parliament in Dublin
acted, until the 1770s, as a rubber stamp for policies made in London.
Attitudes began to change in the last quarter of the 18th century. The
American War of Independence gave the Dublin parliament increased
bargaining power, since British governments wanted a militia of Irish
volunteers to ward off any French attack. For a time, it seemed the Irish
parliament could act in the interests of Irish landowners and businessmen. But
these hopes were dashed once the war ended, and there was much bitterness
against Britain, especially among the growing Protestant commercial middle
class of Belfast.
These feelings coalesced in an enthusiastic response to the French
Revolution. Volunteers began to drill, demand a constitutional convention and
back Catholic emancipation. In 1792 ‘the town of Belfast, now foremost in the
fight for democracy, celebrated by a grand procession and festival the
anniversary of the French Revolution…A republican spirit pervaded the whole
atmosphere.’ Posters attacked religious sectarianism: ‘Superstitious jealousy,
that is the cause of the Irish Bastille: let us unite and destroy it’.55 One of the
organisers of this event, the young Protestant lawyer Wolfe Tone, formed a new
radical organisation, the United Irishmen, at a dinner in Belfast with a dozen
men, mainly businessmen (a draper, a linen manufacturer, a tanner, a clerk, an
apothecary, a watchmaker, and three merchants).56
In Ireland, as in Britain, there was an attempt to destroy the new
Jacobinism with repression. Laws passed on English orders by the Irish upper
class forbade the carrying of arms and outlawed the United Irishmen. Forced
underground, the organisation became increasingly revolutionary. Its aim
became the overthrow of British rule, which had kept Ireland economically
backward and riven it along religious lines. There had to be a revolutionary
rising to create a modern nation, as in France. The United Irishmen took it for
granted that this would be a capitalist nation, but one which had thrown off the
dead weight of foreign rule and native aristocracy. Achieving this, Tone
increasingly saw, depended on the middle class, mainly Protestant United
Irishmen rousing the Catholic peasantry, which had a long tradition of anti-
landlord agitation through armed, underground ‘defender’ groups.
The numbers prepared to back a rising were greater than those at the
disposal of the British government—100,000 compared with about 65,000.57
But they were much less well trained and armed. Success seemed to depend on
getting military support from France.
The rising took place in 1798. But the French support was too little and
came too late, with the landing of 1,100 troops in Mayo in August. By then the
authorities had been able to arrest the leaders of the movement and forced
those rebels who were already armed into premature action. Risings in
Wexford and Antrim were crushed. The repression which followed made the
terror of the French Revolution seem like a child’s game. Reprisals against
those suspected of supporting the rising cost an estimated 30,000 lives.58
That was not the end of the story. As tension had mounted in the three years
before the rising, the authorities had deliberately encouraged groups of
Protestants to organise hate campaigns against Catholics. Local clashes
between Catholic and Protestant peasants in the village of Diamond in Antrim
in the autumn of 1795 had been followed by the founding of a semi-secret
Protestant organisation, the Orange Order. The Anglo-Irish landlords despised
peasants of any sort and stood aside from the new body at first. But they soon
saw it as invaluable in warding off the threat of revolt:
Gradually during 1796 and 1797…the Orange Order was transformed from a
small, scattered and socially unacceptable fringe organisation, despised by the
ruling class, into a powerful province-wide society, approved and actively
sustained by some of the highest individuals in Britain and Ireland.59
General Lake, commander of the armed forces, presided at Orange
processions, and armed Orange groups increasingly worked alongside
government troops and militia to punish supporters of the United Irishmen.
They presented rebel Protestants with a choice—to be whipped and tortured or
join the Orange Order to whip and torture other rebels.60 In such ways, the
British authorities and Anglo-Irish landowners not only crushed the rising, but
gave an enormous boost to sectarian religious feeling.
The two political traditions which have dominated Irish politics for the
last 200 years, Republicanism and Orangeism, were born as off-shoots of a
Europe-wide struggle of revolution and counter-revolution.
For the time being, however, this was hardly a matter of concern for the
‘civilised’ statesmen of the British government. Having successfully
prosecuted a policy of divide and rule against the United Irishmen, two years
later they were able to persuade the Irish parliament to vote itself out of
existence. Irish agriculture and industry had been severely damaged in the past
by exclusion from British-controlled markets. Now they were deprived of any
political means of protecting themselves, while the Anglo-Irish landowners
extracted huge rents and consumed them in unproductive idleness in England.
The British government believed it had solved the ‘Irish question’—a belief
that was to recur every 30 or 40 years right through to the present.
Haiti’s black Jacobins
Counter-revolution did not succeed everywhere. On an island 3,000 miles
away across the Atlantic, in Haiti, the outcome was very different to that in
Ireland. But it took a decade of bitter uprisings, wars and civil wars to attain.
Saint Domingue, the western part of the island of Hispaniola, had been the
richest prize in the French monarchy’s colonial empire. Its plantations
produced more sugar than all of Europe’s other Caribbean and American
colonies put together, and poured wealth into the pockets both of plantation
owners and the commercial capitalists of French ports like Nantes and
Bordeaux.
The source of this wealth lay in the relentless labour of 500,000 black
slaves, whose work so destroyed their lives that only continual imports from
Africa maintained their numbers. Lording it over them were 30,000 whites—a
much smaller proportion of the population than in any of the North American
states—and alongside these lived a similar number of free mixed race
‘mulattos’, some of whom had become quite wealthy and might even be slave-
owners.
The relatively small numbers of the white population did not prevent it
having great pretensions. It felt the wealth of the colony was a result of its own
efforts and resented the rules imposed on its trade by the exclusive—France’s
version of the mercantile system. Accordingly, it felt impelled to advance its
own demands for ‘liberty’ as part of the agitation of the well-to-do middle
class of the ‘home country’ in the spring and summer of 1789. News of the
storming of the Bastille was followed by armed defiance of the royal governor
—although the colonial insurgents had no intention of applying the revolution’s
slogans of ‘liberty’ and ‘equality’ to the black slaves or even the free mulattos.
Although only 7 percent of the population, the whites were very much
divided. The ‘small whites’, owning perhaps three or four slaves each, could
feel as bitter at the humiliation they endured at the hands of the ‘big white’
plantation owner as the French middle class at the aristocracy. The planters,
keen to have a free hand to decide with whom they traded, were not going to
let the ‘small whites’ exercise political control. And both groups were
outraged when the French assembly, in its revolutionary exuberance, decreed
equal rights for all free men, including the mulattos and free blacks—although
it carefully avoided any mention of slavery. Soon there was near civil war
between shifting alliances of the four groups which made up the free
population—the supporters of the governor, the big whites, the small whites
and the mulattos.
All of them expected the black slaves to continue working, suffering,
receiving punishment and dying as if nothing had changed. They were sorely
mistaken. The slaves seized the chance to rebel—setting fire to plantations,
killing slave-owners, forming armed bands to fight off the white militia and
spread the revolt, and throwing up leaders of their own. The most prominent,
the former livestock steward Toussaint L’Ouverture, was soon skilfully
manoeuvring between the rival white groups, the mulattos, an invading Spanish
army from the other half of the island, and successive representatives from the
Girondins in France. Then, just as the sans-culottes were sweeping the
Jacobins to power in France, a British military force landed in Saint
Domingue.
What happened next had much wider implications than just the future of
Saint Domingue. Important sections of the British ruling class, influenced by
the arguments of Adam Smith, had been coming to the conclusion that slavery’s
time was past. After all, they had already lost the sugar plantations of North
America and their West Indian sugar plantations were much less important than
those of France. The government of William Pitt had given some
encouragement to the anti-slavery campaign of William Wilberforce. But the
prospect of taking over Saint Domingue, the most important of all the slave
economies, changed its mind and it prepared to embrace slavery
enthusiastically. Victory in this attempt would have given a new impetus to
slavery throughout the world.
The upward surge of the revolution in France which brought the Jacobins
to power had equally important implications for the slave rebellion. Many of
the Girondin leaders had, personally, been committed opponents of slavery and
members of the Society of the Friends of the Blacks formed in 1788. They
were mainly journalists or lawyers inspired by Enlightenment ideas. But their
most important political base lay with the commercial bourgeoisie of the
western French ports, and these were vehemently against any measures which
would hit their profits. Having propagandised the anti-slavery argument, the
Girondins were not prepared to put it into practice. By contrast the popular
forces which swept the Jacobins forward had no material interest in slavery
and readily identified the suffering of the slaves with their own suffering. At
the same time, the middle class Jacobin leaders, terrified of military defeat at
the hands of a coalition including Britain, could see the advantage of
encouraging slave revolts on the British islands of the Caribbean.
On 4 February 1794 the Jacobin-dominated convention decreed the
abolition of slavery in all French lands, as its president gave a fraternal kiss to
black and mulatto emissaries from Saint Domingue. An alliance had been
formed between two revolutions that was to shatter Pitt’s hopes of enlarging
British capitalism’s stake in slavery. The British expeditionary force of 60,000
troops suffered greater casualties than Wellington’s peninsular army a decade
later. The balance of material calculation in the British parliament shifted
again. It gave the opponents of the slave trade a new hearing and voted to ban
the trade in 1807.
Unfortunately this was not the end of the matter for the ex-slaves of Saint
Domingue. The shift to the right in France after Thermidor gave new influence
to the old slave-owners and their mercantile allies. As Napoleon prepared to
crown himself emperor, he also schemed to reimpose slavery in the colonial
empire. He sent a fleet with 12,000 troops to seize control of Saint Domingue
from Toussaint L’Ouverture’s forces. The war which followed was easily as
bitter as the war against the British. At one point the French army seemed to
have won after Toussaint, mistakenly trying to conciliate with the enemy, was
kidnapped and died in a French prison. It was left to one of his former
lieutenants, Dessalines, to rally black resistance and defeat Napoleon’s army
just as Toussaint had defeated the British army.
Saint Domingue became the independent black state of Haiti. It was a poor
state—15 years of almost continual warfare had done enormous damage. The
sugar economy which had produced so much wealth for a few could not be
restored without near slavery—and although Dessalines’s successor,
Christophe, tried to impose this, the people would not have it. They might be
poor, but they were freer than their fellow blacks in Jamaica, Cuba, Brazil or
North America.
Latin America’s first revolutions
It was the freedom of Haiti that attracted a visit in 1815 from the Venezuelan
who had argued so vociferously for the principles of the revolution at the age
of 16—Bolivar. Now he was one of the leaders of a revolt which was
challenging Spanish rule across Latin America.
The revolt, like that of Haiti, was detonated by events in Europe. In 1808
Napoleon had installed his brother Joseph as king of Spain after the abdication
of the feeble Bourbon king, Charles IV. This provoked a revolt marked by
uprisings in Madrid and massive guerilla activity in the countryside as well as
setpiece battles waged by remnants of the Spanish army with British support.
Much of the dynamism of the revolt came from deeply religious peasants led
by priests horrified at any challenge to the feudal practices of the nobility and
church and determined to reimpose an absolute monarchy under Charles’s son
Ferdinand—complete with the Inquisition. But for a period, a junta (council)
of the liberal bourgeoisie of Cádiz was able to pose as the national focus for
the revolt, even though its ideas were anathema to the forces involved in the
fighting in most parts of the country.
The result was that not just Spain but its whole empire was without a
coherent government for six years. In the Americas there was a sudden power
vacuum all the way from California to Cape Horn. A variety of political forces
set about trying to fill this and, inevitably, ended up in bitter wars with one
another.
Over the previous 300 years the original Spanish settlers had, like the
British in North America and the French in Saint Domingue, begun to develop
interests of their own which clashed with those of the empire’s rulers. The
political crisis in Spain seemed to provide the opportunity to assert those
interests.
The colonial viceroys, pledged to the cause of the Spanish monarchy, were
determined to resist such demands, had troops at their disposal, and could rely
on the church for further backing. The viceroys also had something else going
for them—the splits within colonial society were even greater than they had
been in North America. Vast areas of Latin America were dominated by great
landowners, who had established essentially feudal forms of control over the
indigenous peoples. Meanwhile, in the cities there were merchants whose
fortunes came from trade with Spain rather than other parts of Latin America, a
middle class which believed the crown and the landowners alike were
cramping economic advance, and a mass of artisans, workers, and, in some
regions, black slaves.
Such was the situation when Bolivar, himself from a family of large
landowners, took part in the first insurrection in Venezuela against Spanish rule
in 1810—just as 2,000 miles away the revolutionary priest Hidalgo was
leading a rising in the Mexican town of Guadalajara. The risings enjoyed
initial success and then were crushed. Hidalgo was executed and Bolivar
forced to flee for his life. The pattern was repeated as Bolivar staged another
rising in Caracas, only to be defeated again (and to seek support in Haiti),
while Morelos took up the banner of Hidalgo and was executed in turn.
Bolivar was successful at his third attempt—marching from Venezuela, through
Nueva Granada (now Colombia) into Bolivia and meeting with the ‘liberator’
of Argentina, San Martin, before going on to join with the Chilean ‘liberator’
O’Higgins to drive the Spanish crown from Peru. Meanwhile, a third revolt in
Mexico finally forced the Spanish to concede independence. Yet the victories
were sour for those driven by the ideals of Bolivar and Hidalgo. They had
embraced the values of the French Revolution and aimed not merely at getting
rid of the crown, but at ending feudalism, freeing the slaves and establishing a
full bourgeois republic. Hidalgo had even gone so far as to rouse peasants to
revolt with talk of dividing the land, while Bolivar followed his victories by
calling a ‘Continental Congress’ in Panama to establish a ‘United States’ of
Latin America.
The great landowners who dominated the continent were not interested. It
had been their opposition to such radical talk that led to Bolivar’s initial
defeats and Hidalgo’s execution. Although they eventually hailed Bolivar and
Hidalgo’s successors as ‘liberators’, they also ensured that independence was
on their own terms. Land reform never came, power remained in the hands of
regional oligarchies, and schemes to establish a single Latin American
republic to rival the United States were stillborn. Despite his successes and
the statues of him which adorn every town in Venezuela, Bolivar died a
disappointed man.
Latin America remained very much as it had been before independence—a
continent of a few outstanding colonial cities with a 17th and 18th century
splendour to rival many in Europe, surrounded by vast hinterlands of great
latifundia estates worked by near-serfs. Its ‘nations’ were freed from Spanish
rule but still dependent to a greater or lesser degree on foreign powers.
Mexico was to be invaded by the US and France in the course of the 19th
century, while Britain was to exercise a dominating influence over countries
like Argentina and Chile. In each Latin American country oligarchic cliques
plotted against one another, staged coups, ran rival ‘Liberal’ and
‘Conservative’ parties, and preserved social structures characterised by
extreme privilege on the one hand and vast, stagnating pools of poverty on the
other.
Chapter 4
The retreat of reason
In 1789 revolutionary enthusiasm had swept many intellectual circles
influenced by the Enlightenment. But the feeling was not universal. Voices
were soon heard denouncing what was happening as an assault on civilisation.
Their complaint was not about the terror, which was three years off.
Lafayette’s National Guard was still in tight control of Paris, the king was still
appointing governments, even if they were responsible to the assembly, and
Robespierre was still denouncing capital punishment. The hostility was to the
very suggestion that the mass of people should exercise any say over the affairs
of state.
‘The swinish multitude’ was undermining the very basis of civilisation
according to Edmund Burke in Britain, in a text that became—and remains—
the bible of counter-revolution:
The glory of Europe is extinguished forever. Never, never more shall we
behold the generous loyalty to rank and sex, that proud submission to dignified
obedience, that subordination of the heart, which kept alive even in servitude
itself, the spirit of exalted freedom.61
Burke had not previously been reckoned a dyed in the wool conservative.
He had opposed British policy in America and had damned the behaviour of
the British conquerors of Bengal. Tom Paine, returning to London from
America in the late 1780s, regarded him as a friend. But the mere hint of mass
involvement in political life was too much for him. His denunciation,
Reflections on the Revolution in France, appeared in 1790 and was a polemic
aimed at uniting landed property, moneyed wealth and the ‘cultivated classes’
against any idea that artisans and farmers, let alone ‘servants’ and labourers,
should rule. That meant rejecting each and every concession to liberal
doctrines. Once sympathetic to the abolition of slavery, Burke now denounced
abolitionism as ‘a shred of the accursed web of Jacobinism’.62 In a later
writing, he insisted Tom Paine deserved ‘the refutation of criminal justice’.63
The Reflections was an instant success among the upper classes—50,000
copies were sold in England and numerous foreign translations appeared
within a couple of years. George III loved it, Catherine the Great was
enthusiastic, Stanislav, the last king of Poland, was full of praise. None of
them, of course, had any experience of ‘servitude’ or had ever done anything to
promote the ‘spirit of exalted freedom’.
Burke’s writings in England were soon matched on the continent by those
of de Maistre. He not only insisted that rulers should be ‘separated from the
people by birth or wealth, for once the people have lost their respect for
authority all government will come to an end’,64 but extended the argument into
an attack on the whole basis of the Enlightenment. ‘The greatest crime a
nobleman can commit’, he wrote, ‘is to attack the Christian dogmas’.65
He was not alone in warning that challenges to old prejudices could lead
to challenges from exploited classes to their masters. Gibbon now saw a place
for the absurd Christian beliefs he had savaged in his Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire. He wrote of ‘the danger of exposing old superstitions to the
contempt of the blind and ignorant multitude’.66
Not merely the revolution, but the very foundations of the Enlightenment
were under attack—and this intensified as the advance of the revolutionary
armies made all the crowned heads and aristocrats of Europe quiver. They
turned to obscurantist beliefs as a bulwark against the spread of reasoning
among the masses, and took the most repressive police measures against those
who tried to continue the Enlightenment tradition.
The tide of unreason was strengthened by the disillusionment among many
whose hopes of 1789, dented by the second wave of terror, turned sour with
Thermidor and collapsed into despair with the crowning of Napoleon. Their
mood became one of cynicism or even reaction. ‘Rulers are much the same in
all ages and under all forms of government,’ wrote Coleridge in 1797. The
German poet Hölderlin suggested the hope of a better world was in itself an
evil—‘What has transformed the state into hell is precisely those men who
tried to transform it into heaven’.67 Even those who refused to betray the hopes
of 1789 generally abandoned direct confrontation with the old order. The field
was increasingly open for those who preached blind faith in religious myths
and monarchic delusions.
Whereas 50 years earlier Hume could express openly sceptical views,
Shelley was expelled from Oxford at the age of 18 for defending atheism.
Voltaire had exposed the absurdities of the Old Testament, but not until the
1840s did people like David Strauss resume the attack on the Bible. Buffon
and Lamarck in France and Erasmus Darwin in England had been able in the
18th century to advance the notion that species might evolve. But the
atmosphere in Britain even in the 1830s and 1840s was such that Erasmus’s
grandson Charles delayed 20 years before revealing to the world that he
believed this too and had a new theory as to how it happened.68 The Scottish
Enlightenment thinkers Adam Smith and Adam Ferguson had expounded ideas
about the development of human society from hunting-gathering to the present.
But this was forgotten by those who simply repeated phrases from The Wealth
of Nations, while seeing society as god-given. It was as if there was an attempt
to freeze people’s thinking for the best part of half a century.
The swing from Enlightenment to obscurantism was not total. There
continued to be many advances in mathematics, physics and chemistry—
encouraged more by the spread of industry and the needs of war. Policy
clashes between industrialists seeking profits and landowners interested only
in higher rents led David Ricardo in England to develop Smith’s understanding
of capitalism. The German philosopher Hegel synthesised many Enlightenment
insights into an overview of the development of human understanding, although
in a way which separated this development from any material underpinning.
Walter Scott, Honoré de Balzac, Stendhal and Jane Austen advanced the novel
as the characteristic way of giving literary expression to the dilemmas of the
middle classes in the emerging capitalist world. ‘Romanticism’ in literature,
music and art celebrated feelings and emotions rather than reason. This often
led to the glorification of an allegedly ‘golden’ obscurantist past, but in
societies which had not cast off the remnants of feudalism it could also lead to
a glorification of traditions of folk opposition to tyranny and oppression. A few
‘Utopian’ thinkers like Saint-Simon, Fourier and, in Britain, the successful
pioneering industrial manager Robert Owen, drew up blueprints for how
society could be better organised—although they were unable to point to any
agency for translating these into reality. It required a new generation, born in
the late 1810s and early 1820s, to build on the heritage of the Enlightenment
and the early revolutionary years. But in the meantime, the world was changing
dramatically, despite all the attempts of the Restoration monarchies to
reimpose 18th century patterns of life.
Chapter 5
The industrial revolution
‘In my establishment in New Lanark, mechanical power and operations
superintended by about 2,000 young persons and adults…now complete as
much work as 60 years before would have required the entire working
population of Scotland,’ according to Robert Owen, the industrialist and future
socialist, in 1815.69
He may have been exaggerating somewhat, but he was hammering home an
important truth. Changes were occurring in the ways human beings produced
things on a scale that had not occurred since hunter-gatherers first took up
agriculture 10,000 years earlier. At first these changes were concentrated in
the north of England, the Lowlands of Scotland and parts of Belgium. But they
were soon to shape developments everywhere.
They involved a series of interconnected innovations: the employment of
complex machines; the making of tools from hardened steel instead of wood,
easily bent brass or easily broken cast iron; the smelting of steel in coal
furnaces, not charcoal ones which had to be moved as local forests were
chopped down; and the use of coal to provide, via the steam engine, a massive
new source of motive power to turn machinery.
The combination of the new machines, the new metallurgy and the new
energy source increased immeasurably what people could produce. It also cut
to a fraction the time it took people and goods to move from one place to
another.
In the late 18th century it still took two weeks to travel from Boston to
Philadelphia, a ship could be stuck in harbour for a fortnight or more waiting
for the wind to change, and famines regularly occurred because of the difficulty
of moving foodstuffs from one area to another. Wheeled vehicles had been
known in Eurasia and Africa for more than 3,000 years, but could not be used
on rough or boggy terrain. The mule train was often a more important means of
transporting goods than the cart. In Europe mud roads would often have a stone
parapet down the middle to make movement easier for horses or mules but not
for vehicles. In Mogul India bulk transport on land relied on vast herds of
oxen, each with baggage on its back.70
Now vast armies of labourers using relatively cheap steel picks and
shovels were put to work building canals and the first solid, smooth-surfaced
roads to link major towns. Mine owners discovered that they could speed up
the movement of coal by using vehicles with grooved wheels on rails—at first
made of wood but soon of iron. Engineers applied the steam engine to
powering ships and the rail vehicles as well as factories. In 1830 the first
passenger train ran from Manchester to Liverpool.71 Human beings could
suddenly move at a speed they had scarcely imagined. Goods made in one city
could be in another in a couple of hours instead of a couple of days. There was
the potential for armies to move from one end of a country to the other
overnight.
There was also accelerating change in agriculture, with the final
elimination of the peasantry in Britain through enclosures and with the near-
universal adoption of the previous century’s new crops and new forms of
cultivation—the turnip, the potato, wheat instead of oats or barley, new
grasses, a more efficient plough and improved rotation of crops. The effect
was to increase food output, but also to force unprecedented numbers of
people to seek employment as wage labourers, either on the capitalist farms or
in the new industries.
A class of a new sort
There was a transformation of the working and living conditions of millions of
people. They began to crowd into towns and cities on a scale unknown in
history. So long as industry relied upon charcoal as a fuel and water and wind
for power, much of it was confined to rural areas. Coal and steam changed this.
The modern factory with its giant chimneys began to dominate the landscape of
the area around Manchester in Lancashire and Glasgow in Scotland. By the
1830s Britain was the most urban society humanity had known. In 1750 there
had been only two cities with more than 50,000 inhabitants—London and
Edinburgh. By 1851 there were 29 and the majority of people lived in towns.72
The transformation to modern industrial production was not instantaneous.
As in many Third World countries today, the growth of major industry was
accompanied by a massive growth of small industry based upon ‘sweated
labour’. The industrial revolution in England took root first in textiles and
mining. But in textiles it was cotton spinning that was concentrated in factories,
employing mainly women and children, while weaving was still done by
handloom workers in rural areas. Their numbers increased massively, as did
the numbers employed in many pre-industrial urban trades. And there was a
huge increase in the mining workforce, usually based in villages rather than
towns, albeit villages located by rivers, canals or railway lines.
People had their lives transformed as they became increasingly dependent
on cash relations with the capitalist class for a livelihood. The burgeoning
number of independent handloom weavers in the 1790s was turned into a
desperate mass of people barely able to scratch a livelihood in the 1840s by
competition from new factories using power-looms.
There has been long discussion among economic historians on ‘the
standard of living’ question—on whether people’s lives deteriorated on
entering industry and the city. However, much of the discussion is beside the
point. People moved to the city—as they move to Third World cities like
Bombay or Jakarta today—because it seemed the only alternative to misery in
the countryside. But the city could not provide a secure and comfortable future.
People might have skills one day which, with luck, would enable them to sell
their labour power, but they could find these skills redundant the next—as the
handloom workers did. Change had usually been slow, if painful, in the rural
economy of the early 18th century. In the urban economy of the 19th century it
was often rapid and devastating. Production was for the markets, and markets
could expand and contract at breathtaking speed. During booms people would
abandon old occupations and village homes for the lure of seemingly ‘easy
money’ in the city. During slumps they would find themselves stranded, no
longer with a small piece of land to provide a supply of food, however
meagre, if they lost their jobs.
Sections of the new workers did acquire skills to stabilise their situation
for periods of time. But even they often had to struggle bitterly against attempts
by employers to worsen their conditions, especially when trade slumped or
new technologies were available. And there was always a sizeable section of
the urban population living in ‘pauperdom’—too sick, too old or too unskilled
to make it even into the world of semi-permanent work.
This new labour force was the source of massive wealth. But it was
wealth for others. Even the statisticians who claim to show a rise in the living
standards of the majority of the working population cannot pretend that it
measured up to the advances which occurred in productivity. While the new
working class had to cope somehow, living just above or below subsistence
level, the sort of people who inhabit, say, a Jane Austen novel, wined, dined,
hunted, courted each other and supped tea in beautiful surroundings. In the
hungry years after 1815 some 12 percent of national output went as interest to
holders of the national debt.
Those who lived off its sweat saw the new workforce as presenting a
continual problem—how to make it work as they wished. Workers brought up
in the countryside were used to the rhythm of the seasons, to short periods of
intense labour interspersed with longer periods with opportunities for
relaxation. They would not only take Sunday off but also, if they could,
Monday (known as ‘Saint Monday’ in England and ‘Blue Monday’ in
Germany). Breaking such habits became an obsession for the factory owners.
The machines had to be worked from sunrise to sunset, and longer still once
the invention of gaslights made night work possible. Clocks installed in
factories were there to hammer home the new saying, ‘Time is money’.73
Human nature itself had to be changed so that people would come to think there
was nothing strange about spending all their daylight hours in a closed room
without seeing the sun, the trees and flowers or hearing the birds.
The propertied classes believed any attempt to alleviate poverty would
undermine the new discipline. If poor people could obtain any sort of income
without working, they would become ‘idle, lazy, fraudulent and worthless’,
lose ‘all habits of prudence, of self respect and self restraint’ and develop a
‘spirit of laziness and insubordination’.74
Thomas Malthus had conveniently provided a ‘proof’ that the living
standards of the poor could not be improved. They would simply have more
children until they were worse off than before, he said. Jean-Baptiste Say, a
populariser of Adam Smith’s ideas, had also ‘proved’ that unemployment was
impossible in a genuinely free market. If people could not find work it was
because they demanded wages higher than the market could bear. Poor relief,
by offering a cushion against destitution, simply encouraged this disastrous
practice. The only way to deal with poverty was to make the poor poorer!
Conditions had to be such that the ‘able bodied’ unemployed would do
virtually anything rather than apply for relief. The Poor Law Amendment Act,
passed in Britain in 1834, set out to establish these conditions by limiting
relief to those who were prepared to be confined in prison-like workhouses—
nicknamed ‘Bastilles’ by those they threatened.
It was not only the physical lives of the workforce that changed with
industrialisation. There was also a change in mentality. Life in crowded
conurbations produced very different attitudes from those in isolated villages.
It could lead to loneliness and despair as well as poverty. But it could also
lead to new feelings of class community, as people found themselves living
and working alongside unprecedented numbers of other people with the same
problems and in the same conditions. What is more, it gave people a greater
awareness of the wider world than was typical in the countryside. Workers
were much more likely to be able to read and write than their peasant
forebears, and through reading and writing to know about distant places and
events.
The new world of work brought with it a new form of family and a radical
change in the position of women. The peasant wife had always played a
productive role, but it was usually one subordinated to her husband, who was
responsible for most transactions with society outside the family. By contrast,
in the first flood of the industrial revolution it was women (and children) who
were concentrated in their hundreds and thousands in factories. Conditions
were horrible—so horrible that many dreamed of finding a man who could free
them from the double toil of sweated labour and childcare. But for the first
time women also had money of their own and a degree of independence from
husbands or lovers. The ‘millgirls’ of Lancashire were famed for standing up
for themselves, as were the grisettes of the east end of Paris for taunting the
police and challenging soldiers. In revolutionising production, capitalism was
also beginning to overturn attitudes which had helped sustain the oppression of
women for thousands of years.
Objects and subjects
The new class of industrial workers did not simply suffer. It soon showed it
could fight back. In the 17th and 18th centuries the concentration of certain
artisan trades in towns and cities had been expressed in the role played by
apprentices and journeymen in the English Revolution, by the ‘mechanics’ of
New York and Pennsylvania in the American Revolution, and, above all, by the
sans-culottes in the French Revolution. Now people were being concentrated
on a much greater scale, in huge workplaces grouped in conurbations of
unprecedented size. It provided them with possibilities of resistance greater
than those open to any previous exploited class—and it was resistance that
could encourage the growth of ideas opposed to existing society in its entirety.
The radical agitator John Thelwell had observed in 1796 what the future
might hold:
Monopoly and the hideous accumulation of capital in a few hands…carry in
their own enormity the seeds of cure…Whatever presses men together…though
it may generate some vices is favourable to the diffusion of knowledge, and
ultimately promotive of human liberty. Hence every large workshop and
manufactory is a sort of political society, which no act of parliament can
silence and no magistrate disperse.75
His prophecy was confirmed within two decades. A new wave of agitation
began, fitfully, in Britain towards the end of the Napoleonic Wars. It was
eventually to achieve greater dimensions and to be sustained over a longer
period than any wave of protest before. It arose from various currents—the
radical artisans of London who were heirs of the movement of the 1790s; the
stocking maker and weaver ‘Luddites’ whose wages were being forced down
by the introduction of machines; and the illegal trade unions of skilled workers,
cotton spinners and farm labourers (whose ‘Tolpuddle Martyr’ leaders were
transported to Australia). The struggle went through different phases—machine
breaking, mass demonstrations like that attacked by the gentry militia at
‘Peterloo’ in Manchester in 1819, big strikes, agitation for the vote alongside
the middle class in 1830-32, attacks on workhouses after 1834, protests at the
establishment of the police forces designed to keep a grip on working class
neighbourhoods. These struggles threw up a succession of leaders who
organised, agitated, propagandised and began, in some cases, to turn certain of
the ideas of Adam Smith and David Ricardo against the capitalists. The
movement also had newspapers of its own like the Black Dwarf and the Poor
Man’s Guardian—papers whose owners faced repeated arrest as they
reported the agitation and challenged capitalists and landowners alike.
The Chartists
In the late 1830s these different streams of agitation flowed together to give
rise to the Chartist movement. Here was something never before seen in history
—a movement of the people whose labour kept society going, organised from
below, not just as a one-off riot or revolt, but a permanent organisation, with
its own democratic structures. Its principal paper, the Northern Star, founded
in Leeds in 1837, soon had a circulation as great as the main ruling class
paper, the Times, and its articles were read out loud for the illiterate in
workshops and pubs in every industrial area.
The history taught in British schools often treats Chartism as a minor
movement, damned by its eventual failure. But it was the biggest mass
movement in Britain in the 19th century. Three times it threw the ruling class
into a panic. In 1838-39 hundreds of thousands of workers attended mass
meetings at which the points of the Chartist programme were presented and
debated; tens of thousands began to drill in expectation of a popular rising; the
government was worried enough to send the military to the industrial areas;
and there was an attempted armed rising in Newport, south Wales.76 Then in
1842 the first general strike in history occurred in Lancashire as workers
marched from factory to factory, putting out furnaces and spreading their
action.77 Finally, in 1848, roused to new action by industrial depression in
Britain, famine in Ireland and a wave of revolutions in Europe, masses of
workers prepared again for confrontation. Their hopes were disappointed. The
state stood firm, the lower middle class rallied behind it, the Chartist leaders
vacillated, and the anger which had led 100,000 to gather in Kennington, south
London, dissipated—but not before the government had turned half of London
into an armed camp.78
Like every living movement, Chartism comprised a mixture of different
groups holding different ideas. Its formal programme—the points of the
Charter—was one of far-reaching democratic reform based on universal male
suffrage and annual parliaments rather than on a socialist reorganisation of the
economy. Its leaders were divided between adherents of ‘moral force’, who
believed in winning over the existing rulers, and the adherents of ‘physical
force’, who believed in overthrowing them. Even the physical force party had
no real idea of how to achieve its goal. Yet in the dozen odd years of its
existence Chartism showed something quite dramatic. The bourgeoisie had not
yet finished fighting its own battles to clear away the debris of feudalism in
much of Europe. But it was already creating alongside it a new exploited class
capable of turning the revolutionary language of the French Revolution against
the bourgeoisie itself.
This was as important for world history as the French Revolution and the
industrial revolution had been. The success of Britain’s capitalists in
industrialising was encouraging others elsewhere to try to emulate them. There
were already a few factories in France and parts of southern Germany before
1789. Now islands of industry were emerging not only in these countries, but
in northern Italy, Catalonia, Bohemia, the northern United States, and even in
the Russian Urals and on the Nile. Everywhere there was the smoke of the new
factories there were also outbursts of spontaneous anger and defiance from
those who laboured in them. In 1830 the Parisian masses took to the streets for
the first time since 1795. The advisers of the Bourbon king, Charles X, saw
only one way to halt the revolution—to persuade the king to go straight into
exile and to wheel on in his place a relative, the ‘bourgeois monarch’ Louis
Philippe of Orleans. The manoeuvre succeeded, but the display of lower class
power was enough to inspire a flurry of risings in other parts of Europe—all
unsuccessful apart from the one which separated Belgium from Holland to
form an independent state under British protection.
The French poet and historian Lamartine commented, ‘The proletarian
question is the one that will cause a terrible explosion in present day society if
society and governments fail to fathom and resolve it’.79 His prophesy was
proven correct 18 years later when the whole of Europe was shaken by
revolution and Lamartine himself enjoyed a brief moment of glory.
Chapter 6
The birth of Marxism
‘A spectre is haunting Europe—the spectre of Communism’, begins the
introduction to one of the most influential pamphlets ever. Two Germans exiled
in Paris completed it at the end of 1847. It predicted imminent revolution, and
scarcely was the ink dry on the first printed copies than revolution had broken
out. But this, alone, does not explain the enormous impact of a work that was
soon to be translated into every European language. What enthralled readers
then—and still does today—was its ability in a mere 40 or so pages to locate
the emergence of the new industrial capitalist society in the overall scheme of
human history. It endeavoured to show that it was as transitory as the forms of
society which preceded it, and to explain the immense class conflicts which
were besetting it even where it had not yet fully disposed of the old feudal
order.
The authors, Frederick Engels and Karl Marx, were men of enormous
ability. But it was not simply personal genius which ensured they made such an
enormous impact—any more than it was the personal genius of Plato or
Aristotle, of Confucius or Buddha, of Saul of Tarsus or the prophet
Mohammed, of Voltaire or Rousseau, that ensured their place in history. They
lived at a place and in a time when all the contradictions of a period came
together, and they had at their disposal something the others did not: access to
intellectual traditions and scientific advances which enabled them not merely
to feel but also to explain these contradictions.
They were both from middle class families in the Prussian Rhineland.
Marx’s father was a well-to-do government official, of Protestant religion but
Jewish upbringing and ancestry. Engels’ father was a prosperous manufacturer
with factories in the Rhineland and in Manchester. In the Rhineland of the
1830s and 1840s such backgrounds did not necessarily lead to conformity.
Capitalism was more developed there than anywhere else in Germany, and the
French occupation of only a few years before had swept away the residues of
feudal society. But these were still dominant in the Prussian monarchy which
ruled the region. Even among the older middle class there was a desire for
‘reforms’ which would free them from this burden, and among the younger
generation this translated into a spirit of radicalism.
Germany as a whole, like most of the rest of Europe, had gone through a
period of intellectual reaction in the first decades of the century. The country’s
most famous philosopher, Hegel, now wrapped his old belief in the progress of
the human spirit through history in mystical, religious clothing and extolled the
virtues of the Prussian state (or at least its ‘estates’-based constitution of the
1820s). But among the generation who entered the universities in the 1830s and
early 1840s there was a turning back to the ideas of the Enlightenment and even
the early years of the French Revolution. ‘Young Hegelians’ such as Bruno
Bauer turned Hegel’s notion that everything changes through contradiction into
a liberal criticism of existing German society. David Strauss extended
Voltaire’s attack on the Old Testament into a questioning of the New Testament.
Ludwig Feuerbach took up the materialist philosophy expounded 80 years
before by d’Holbach and Helvetius. Karl Grün won a wide following for his
‘true socialist’ call for enlightened men of all classes to work together to bring
about a better society than either feudalism or capitalism.
Marx and Engels were an integral part of this generation as it tried to come
to terms with a society caught between past and present. They studied Hegel,
took up the arguments of Feuerbach, delved into the ideas of Helvetius and
d’Holbach, and followed up Strauss’s criticism of religion. But they did more
than that. They also confronted the new industrial capitalism which was
making its first, limited inroads. Engels was sent by his father to help manage
his Manchester factory and experienced at first hand the clash between the
bright future promised by liberal ideals in Germany and the harsh reality of life
for workers in Britain’s industrial revolution—chronicling these in his The
Condition of the Working Class in England. He also came across workers
who were fighting back against this reality. Arriving in Manchester in the
aftermath of the general strike of 1842, he joined the Chartist movement.80 This
in turn led him into contact with the ‘Utopian Socialist’ criticisms of capitalism
contained in the writings of Robert Owen, and to a critical study of the
‘political economy’ used to justify the existing system.81
After finishing his doctorate on Greek atomist philosophy, Marx was
appointed editor of a recently formed liberal paper, the Rheinische Zeitung, at
the age of 24. This led to clashes with the Prussian censor—the paper was
banned after six months—and brought Marx face to face for the first time, he
later explained, with ‘material questions’. He wrote about the attempts by the
nobility to treat the peasants’ tradition of gathering wood from the forest as
‘theft’, and began to consider what property was and where it came from. He
was exiled to Paris where a critical reading of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right,
with its defence of monarchic coercion as the only way to bind together an
atomised society, convinced him that a merely liberal constitution could not
produce real freedom for people. He began a serious study of the political
economists, especially Smith and Ricardo, and wrote his conclusions about the
nature of capitalism in an unpublished manuscript.82
Alienation
Marx noted that the system as described by Smith, Ricardo and their followers
made the lives of people dependent upon the operations of the market. But the
market itself was nothing other than the interaction of the products of people’s
labour. In other words, people had become prisoners of their own past activity.
Feuerbach had described the way people worshipped gods they themselves
had created as ‘alienation’. Marx now applied the same term to the capitalist
market:
The object that labour produces, its product, confronts it as an alien power,
independent of the producer. The product of labour is labour that has solidified
itself into an object, made itself into a thing, the objectification of labour…In
political economy this realisation of labour appears as a loss of reality for the
worker, objectification as a loss of the object or enslavement to it…
The more the worker produces, the less he has to consume. The more
values he creates, the more valueless, the more unworthy he becomes…[The
system] replaces labour by machines, but it throws one section of workers
back to a barbarous type of labour, and it turns the other section into a
machine…It produces intelligence—but for the worker, stupidity…It is true
that labour produces wonderful things for the rich—but for the worker it
produces privation. It produces palaces—but for the worker, hovels. It
produces beauty—but for the worker, deformity…The worker only feels
himself outside his work, and in his work feels outside himself. He feels at
home when he is not working, when he is working he does not feel at home.83
Marx’s conclusion was that workers could only overcome this inhumanity
by collectively taking control of the process of production, by ‘communism’.
Human liberation did not lie, as the liberal democrats said, in a mere political
revolution to overthrow the remnants of feudalism, but in social revolution to
establish a ‘communist’ society.
Marx and Engels worked together to give practical content to their newly
formed ideas through participation in the groups of exiled German socialists in
Paris and Brussels. This culminated in them joining an organisation of exiled
artisans, the League of the Just, which was soon to be renamed the Communist
League—and to commission them to write The Communist Manifesto.
In the meantime, they developed their ideas. In the book The Holy Family
and an unpublished manuscript, The German Ideology, they criticised the left
Hegelians—and with them the notion inherited from the Enlightenment that
society could be changed merely by the struggle of reason against superstition.
They used Feuerbach’s materialism to do this, but in the process went beyond
Feuerbach. He had seen religion as an ‘alienated’ expression of humanity. But
he had not asked why such alienation occurred. Marx and Engels traced this
alienation to the efforts of successive generations of human beings to wrest a
livelihood from nature and the way this led to differing relations between
people. Feuerbach’s materialism, they insisted, had neglected the role of
human beings in changing the external world as well as being changed by it.
This ‘dialectical’ interaction, they argued, permitted a materialist interpretation
of history. They combined it with their critique of political economy to provide
an overall view of history and society in The Communist Manifesto.
This is not the place to go into the details of that view—especially since
this whole book is an attempt to interpret history on the basis of it. But certain
important points do need spelling out.
The new world system
Marx’s ideas are often dismissed as out of date because they were written a
century and a half ago—especially by those who base themselves on a
simplistic reading of Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations, published more than 40
years before Marx was born. Yet, written at a time when industrial capitalism
was confined to a small area of the western fringe of Eurasia, the Manifesto
presents a prophetic vision of capitalism filling the world—of what today is
called ‘globalisation’:
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the
bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere,
settle everywhere…The bourgeoisie through its exploitation of the world
market gives a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every
country. To the great chagrin of reactionaries it has drawn from under the feet
of industry the national ground on which it stood…In place of the old local and
national seclusion and self sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction,
universal interdependence of nations…
The bourgeoisie by its rapid improvement of all the instruments of
production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all…
nations into civilisation. The cheap price of its commodities are the heavy
artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls…It compels all nations,
on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production…In one
word, it creates a world after its own image.
If such passages are to be criticised, it cannot be because they are out of
date, but rather because the processes Marx described were only in an
embryonic condition when he wrote. Today’s world is much more like Marx’s
picture than was the world of 1847.
Marx and Engels took up the theme of alienation and presented it in much
simpler language:
In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase accumulated
labour…the past dominates the present…Capital is independent and has
individuality, while the living person is dependent and has no individuality.
This damns bourgeois society itself:
Bourgeois society…that has conjured up such a gigantic means of production
and of exchange is like a sorcerer who is no longer able to control the power
of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells…It is enough to recall
the great commercial crises that by their periodical return put the existence of
the entire bourgeois society on trial, each time more threateningly…In these
crises there breaks out an epidemic that in earlier epochs would have seemed
an absurdity—the epidemic of over-production…It appears as if a famine, a
universal war of devastation, has cut off the supply of every means of
subsistence; industry and commerce seem to have been destroyed. And why?
Because there is too much means of subsistence, too much industry, too much
commerce…And how does the bourgeoisie get out of these crises? On the one
hand, by enforced destruction of a mass of productive forces; on the other, by
conquest of new markets and by the more thorough exploitation of old ones.
That is to say, by preparing the way for more extensive and more destructive
crises, and by diminishing the means by which such crises are prevented.
Marx and Engels only had space to give a cursory overview of the crisis
and the long term destiny of capitalism in the Manifesto. Much of the rest of
Marx’s life was devoted—through a scrupulous reading of the texts of
bourgeois political economy and an intense empirical study of the world’s first
industrial capitalism, that of Britain—to elaborating how the logic of
capitalism, of a world built upon the accumulation and circulation of alienated
labour, worked itself out.84
Marx and Engels noted an important contrast between capitalism and
previous forms of class society. Previous ruling classes looked to enforce
conservatism to bolster their rule. But however much capitalists looked to this
as a political and ideological option, the economic momentum of their own
society continually undercut it:
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the instruments
of production, and thereby the relations of production, and with them the whole
relations of society…Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted
disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation
distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast frozen
relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are
swept away, all new formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify.
All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and humans85 are at
last compelled to face with sober senses their real conditions of life and their
relations with their kind.
Workers and the new system
The Manifesto stressed something else about capitalism, and about the
working class arising out of it:
In proportion as the bourgeoisie, ie capital, is developed, in the same
proportion is the proletariat, the modern working class, developed—a class of
labourers who live only so long as they can find work, and who find work only
so long as their labour increases capital. These labourers, who must sell
themselves piecemeal, are a commodity, like every other article of commerce,
and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes of competition, to all the
fluctuations of the market.
The working class is concentrated by the development of capitalism itself
into a force that can fight back against capitalism:
With the development of industry, the proletariat not only increases in number;
it becomes concentrated in greater masses, its strength grows, and it feels that
strength more. The various interests and conditions of life within the ranks of
the proletariat are more and more equalised, in proportion as machinery
eliminates all distinctions of labour, and nearly everywhere wages are reduced
to the same low level…Commercial crises make the wages of workers ever
more fluctuating. The unceasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly
developing, makes their livelihood more and more precarious.
Out of this situation develop ‘combinations’—trade unions—which begin
the organisation of workers into a class. Even if this is:
…continually being upset by the competition of workers among themselves…
The essential condition for the existence and for the sway of the bourgeois
class is the formation and augmentation of capital; the condition for capital is
wage labour. The advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the
bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition, by the
revolutionary combination, due to association. The development of modern
industry, therefore, cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the
bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie
therefore produces, above all, are its own gravediggers.
These passages, like those on the development of large-scale industry and
the world market, were a projection into the future of developing trends rather
than an empirically accurate account of Europe—let alone Africa, Asia and the
Americas—in 1847. In France and Germany the industrial working class was
still a small proportion of the population, not ‘the immense majority acting in
the interests of the immense majority’ (as another passage described it). In
Germany even in 1870 factory workers were only 10 percent of the total
workforce. And although they were much more than this in Britain in 1848,
there were still large numbers working on the land, in small workshops or as
servants. What Marx and Engels saw clearly, however, was that as capital
conquered the globe this class would grow.
Their picture is sometimes criticised because it assumed that the growth
would be of stereotypical ‘proletarians’ in large industry. I will return to this
point later, in dealing with the history of the last quarter of the 20th century.
Here it should be said that although this might have been their assumption,
based on Engels’ experience of Manchester and of Chartism, it is not built into
the logic of their argument. The growth of wage labour in place of peasant or
artisan production does not in itself necessitate the growth of one particular
form of wage labour. All it implies is that an ever greater proportion of the
social workforce will depend for a livelihood on selling their capacity to work
(what Marx was later to call their ‘labour power’). And the conditions and
wages for their work will be determined, on the one hand by the competitive
drive of capital, and on the other by the degree to which they fight back against
capital. It is besides the point whether they work in factories, offices or call
centres, whether they wear overalls, white collars or jeans. Seen in these
terms, it is difficult to fault the logic of Marx and Engels’ argument at a time
when workers of all sorts are told that their livelihoods depend upon the
success of firms or countries in ‘global competition’.
Marx and Engels half recognised at the end of the Manifesto the still
undeveloped character of capitalism globally. ‘The Communists turn their
attention chiefly to Germany because that country is on the eve of a bourgeois
revolution,’ they wrote. It was, they added, ‘bound to be carried out under
much more advanced conditions of European civilisation and with a much
more developed proletariat than that of England in the 17th century and France
in the 18th century’ and to be ‘but the prelude to an immediately following
proletarian revolution’.
About the imminence of revolution they were to be proved completely
correct, as they were about the much greater role workers would play in this
than in previous revolutions. What they could not foresee was the way the
bourgeoisie would react to this much greater role.
Chapter 7
1848
I spent the whole afternoon wandering Paris and was particularly struck by
two things: first the uniquely and exclusively popular character of the recent
revolution and of the omnipotence it had given the so-called people—that is to
say, the classes who work with their hands—over all other classes. Secondly
how little hatred was shown from the first moment of victory by the humble
people who had suddenly become the sole mentors of power…
Throughout the whole day in Paris I never saw one of the former agents of
authority: not a soldier, nor a gendarme, nor a policeman; even the National
Guard had vanished. The people alone bore arms, guarded public buildings,
watched, commanded and punished; it was an extraordinary and terrible thing
to see the whole of this huge city in the hands of those who owned nothing.86
These were the words of the historian Alexis de Tocqueville, writing
about 25 February 1848. The French king, Louis Philippe, had just abdicated
and fled the country. A protest march by republican students and sections of the
middle class had clashed with police outside the ministry of foreign affairs,
igniting a spontaneous rising in the poorer, eastern part of Paris which had
been the centre of sans-culottes agitation in the revolution of half a century
before. Crowds chanting ‘Vive la réforme’ burst through the lines of troops and
swarmed through the palaces and the assembly buildings. Opposition
politicians threw together a government headed by Lamartine. To ensure it
gained the support of the masses, they included a socialist reformer, Louis
Blanc, and, for the first time in history, a manual worker, Albert.
The revolution in France was a bomb beneath every throne in Europe.
There had already been a brief civil war in Switzerland the previous
December and a rising in Sicily in January. Successful uprisings now followed
in Vienna, Milan, Venice, Prague, Berlin, and the industrial towns and state
capitals of virtually every German principality. In every city, protests led off
by the liberal middle classes culminated in huge crowds defeating attacks by
the army and the police and taking over palaces and government buildings.
Reactionary politicians like Metternich, the architect of counter-revolution in
1814 and 1815, now fled for their lives. Monarchs and aristocrats remained
behind, but only kept their positions by professing agreement with liberal
constitutions. Absolutism seemed dead virtually everywhere. Radical
democratic reforms seemed achieved—universal male suffrage, freedom of the
press, the right to trial by jury, the end of aristocratic privilege and feudal
payments.
But it was not to be. By the summer the monarchs and aristocrats were
regaining their confidence. They began attacking rather than bowing before the
democratic movements and, in the late autumn, crushed the movement in key
centres like Berlin, Vienna and Milan. By the summer of 1849 counter-
revolution was once more victorious throughout the whole continent.
The revolutions in February and March had been victorious because
risings involving the mass of small traders, artisans and workers had beaten
back armies and police officered by monarchists and aristocrats. But the
governments and parliaments put in place by them were composed mainly of
sections of the propertied middle classes. So the parliament elected for the
whole of Germany (including German-speaking Austria) which met in
Frankfurt in May contained no fewer than 436 state employees (led by
administrative and judicial officials), 100 businessmen and landowners, 100
lawyers and 50 clergymen.87 Such people were not prepared to put their lives,
or even their careers, at risk by revolutionary action against the old authorities.
What is more, they regarded the masses who had brought them to power as a
‘disorderly rabble’, quite as terrifying as the old ruling class.
The same fear afflicted the new governments and parliamentarians as had
held back the ‘Presbyterians’ in the English Revolution, the ‘moderates’ of
New York and Pennsylvania in the American Revolution, and the Girondins in
the French Revolution. But it did so on a greater scale. No revolutionary
middle class force comparable to the ‘Independents’ or Jacobins emerged to
impose its will on the rest.
The growing islands of industry across western Europe meant the capitalist
class was bigger and more powerful in 1848 than it had been at the time of the
French Revolution. Alongside it there was a growing middle class of
intellectuals, professors, teachers and civil servants who looked to England as
their economic model and the unified national state established by the French
Revolution as their political model. In Hungary and Poland even sections of
the nobility agitated for national independence from Austria and Russia.
But the other side of the growth of the constitutional-minded, or even
republican, middle class was the growth of the working class. Most production
might still be in small workshops where artisans employed a few journeymen,
or in the homes of weavers and spinners working for a ‘putting-out’ merchant.
Nonetheless, conditions were increasingly subject to the debilitating and
unifying impact of the capitalist market. In Paris, for instance:
In substantial parts of artisan manufacture, effective control of production was
passing to merchants who organised sales and controlled credits. Workers in
these trades and even the master artisans who employed them, as well as
factory workers, were more and more conscious of external forces governing
their lives, all seeking to make them more efficient at all costs. These forces
were commonly identified with ‘capitalism’ or ‘financial feudalism’.88
Similar conditions were present, to a greater or lesser extent, in Berlin,
Vienna and the industrial towns of the Rhineland.
The bitterness intensified after 1845 as harvest failures interacted with the
ups and downs of the market economy to produce a great economic crisis from
Ireland in the west—where a million starved to death as grain was exported to
pay for rents—to Prussia in the east. Hunger, rising prices and massive levels
of unemployment fuelled the discontent which flared into revolution in
February and March 1848. Artisans and workers joined and transformed the
character of the street protests organised by the middle class constitutionalists
and republicans. Peasants in regions like the Black Forest rose up against
feudal dues and aristocratic landowners as they had not done since the Peasant
War of 1525.
The scale of the discontent sent a shiver of fear down the spine of every
capitalist, big or small. For the workers and peasants were not just concerned
with democratic constitutions or feudal privilege. They were demanding living
standards and conditions that challenged capitalist profits and capitalist
property. The propertied liberals would unite with their traditional opponents,
the propertied aristocrats and monarchists, to oppose this.
There were already signs of this in Germany and Austria before the blood
was dry from the March fighting. The new governments restricted membership
of the National Guard to the middle class, left the officer corps of the old
armies untouched, conciliated with the old monarchist state bureaucracies, and
ordered the peasants to stop their risings against feudal dues. The Prussian
parliament in Berlin spent its time drawing up a constitutional agreement with
the Prussian king, and the supposed all-German parliament in Frankfurt did
little more than argue over its own rules of procedure. Neither parliament did
anything to provide a focus for people’s revolutionary aspirations or to stop
aristocratic reaction beginning to regroup and rearm its forces.
The June fighting
It was in Paris, however, that the decisive turning point in events occurred.
The workers and artisans who had played the decisive role in
overthrowing the old order in February had economic and social grievances of
their own which went far beyond the liberal-democratic programme of the
government. In particular they demanded work at a living wage.
They were not a formless mass. In the years since 1830 clubs committed to
social reform (led by people like Louis Blanc) and secret societies which
combined social demands with Jacobin insurrectionism (led by people like
August Blanqui) had gained a following. Their ideas were discussed in cafes
and workshops. ‘Republican and socialist newspapers which stressed the need
for representative government as a means of ending insecurity and poverty
proved increasingly attractive as the prosperous early years of the 1840s gave
way to a period of intense crisis’.89
The government formed amid the armed crowds on 24-25 February was in
no condition to ignore the demands they raised. It met ‘under pressure from the
people and before their eyes’ with continual ‘processions, deputations,
manifestations’.90 Thus, it decreed a one and a half hour reduction in the
working day and promised employment for all citizens. It set up ‘national
workshops’ to provide work for the unemployed, and Louis Blanc, as minister
of labour, established a ‘labour commission’ in the Luxembourg Palace where
‘between 600 and 800 members—employers’ representatives, workmen’s
representatives, economists of every school’ became ‘a virtual parliament’.91
At first the propertied classes did not dare raise any complaint about this.
The tone changed once the immediate shock of 24-25 February had passed.
Financiers, merchants and industrialists set about turning middle class opinion
against the ‘social republic’. They blamed the deepening economic crisis on
the concessions to the workers and the national workshops (although they
were, in fact, little better than the English workhouses).
The bourgeois republicans in the government concurred. They rushed to
placate the financiers by recognising the debts of the old regime, and they
imposed a tax on the peasantry in an attempt to balance the budget. They
ensured the National Guard was dominated by the middle classes, and
recruited thousands of the young unemployed into an armed force, the Gardes
mobiles, under their own control. They also called elections for a Constituent
Assembly at the end of April. This gave the Parisian artisans and workers no
time to spread their message outside the capital and ensured the election
campaign among the peasantry was dominated by landowners, lawyers and
priests who blamed the new taxes on ‘red’ Paris. The new assembly was
dominated by barely disguised supporters of the rival royal dynasties92 and
immediately sacked the two socialist ministers.
Then on 21 June the government announced the closure of the national
workshops and gave the unemployed a choice between dispersal to the
provinces and enrolment in the army.
Every gain the workers and artisans had made in February was taken from
them. They saw no choice but to take up arms again. The next day they threw
up barricades throughout the east of Paris and did their utmost to press towards
the centre. The republican government turned on them with the full ferocity of
the armed forces at its disposal—up to 30,000 soldiers, between 60,000 and
80,000 members of the National Guard, and up to 25,000 Gardes mobiles93,
all under the command of General Cavaignac. Civil war raged throughout the
city for four days, with the better-off western areas pitted against the poorer
eastern districts.
On one side, supporting the ‘republican government’, were the monarchists
of both dynasties, the landowners, the merchants, the bankers, the lawyers and
the middle class republican students.94
On the other were some 40,000 insurgents, ‘drawn mainly from the small-
scale artisan trades of the city—from building, metalwork, clothing, shoes and
furniture, with the addition of workers from some modern industrial
establishments such as the railway engineering workshops, as well as a large
number of unskilled labourers and a not inconsiderable number of small
businessmen’.95 Each centre of resistance was dominated by a particular trade
—carters in one place, dock workers in another, joiners and cabinet makers in
a third. As Frederick Engels noted, it was not only men who fought. At the
barricade on the Rue de Clery, seven defenders included ‘two beautiful young
grisettes [poor Parisian women]’, one of whom was shot as she advanced
alone towards the National Guard carrying the red flag.96
The rising was crushed in the bloodiest fashion. A National Guard officer,
the artist Meissonier, reported:
When the barricade in the Rue de la Martellerie was taken, I realised all
horror of such warfare. I saw defenders shot down, hurled out of windows, the
ground strewn in corpses, the earth red with blood.97
The number of dead is not known, but 12,000 people were arrested and
thousands deported to French Guyana.
The return of the old order
The defeat of the Parisian workers gave heart to the opponents of revolution
everywhere. The German Junker (noble) Bismarck told the Prussian National
Assembly, it was ‘one of the most fortunate events in the whole of Europe’.98
In the German kingdoms and principalities the authorities began dissolving left
wing and republican clubs, prosecuting newspapers and arresting agitators. In
Italy the Austrians inflicted a defeat on the Piedmont army and regained control
of Milan, while the king of Naples established military rule. The Austrian
general Windischgraetz imposed a state of siege in Prague after five days of
fighting with the Czech middle class, students and workers. He occupied
Vienna in the face of bitter popular resistance at the end of October, leaving
2,000 dead, and then moved against Hungary. A week later the Prussian king
dissolved the Constituent Assembly in Berlin. The ‘moderate’ majority in the
Frankfurt parliament responded to this openly counter-revolutionary measure
by offering to proclaim him emperor of Germany in March—an offer which he
rejected before sending his army into south Germany to crush further
revolutionary moves.
The great hopes of the spring of 1848 had given way to desperation by the
beginning of 1849. But the wave of revolution was not yet dead. The
democratic associations and workers’ clubs still had a much higher active
membership than the conservative and ‘moderate’ organisations. The spring
saw successful risings in parts of the Rhineland, the Palatinate, Dresden,
Baden and Württemberg, with rulers running away just as they had the previous
March. But many people still looked to the Frankfurt parliament to give a lead
—and this it was not prepared to do. The revolutionary army which formed in
the south (with Frederick Engels as one of its advisers) was thrown on to the
defensive, defeated in battle and forced by the advancing Prussian army to flee
across the border into Switzerland. The Hungarians led by Kossuth were
finally crushed when the Austrian emperor received military assistance from
the Russian tsar. The king of Naples reconquered Sicily in May, and
revolutionary nationalists who had seized control of Rome and driven out the
pope were forced to abandon the city after a three month siege by the armed
forces of the French republic.
In France, where the whole revolutionary process had begun, the middle
class republicans found that, having defeated the workers, there was no one to
protect them against the advance of the monarchists. However, the monarchists
were divided between the heirs of the Bourbons and the heirs of Louis
Philippe and were incapable of deciding who to impose as king. Into this gap
stepped a nephew of Napoleon, Louis Bonaparte. He won the presidency late
in 1848 with 5.5 million votes—against only 400,000 for the middle class
republican leader Ledru Rollin and 40,000 for the left wing revolutionary
Raspail. In 1851, fearing he would lose a further election, he staged a coup.
The following year he proclaimed himself emperor.
Karl Marx drew the conclusion at the end of the year:
The history…of the whole German bourgeoisie from March to December…
demonstrates…that purely bourgeois revolution…is impossible in Germany…
What is possible is either the feudal and absolutist counter-revolution or the
social republican revolution.99
Backdoor bourgeoisie
The revolutions did not leave Europe completely unchanged, however. In
Germany and Austria they brought about the final end of feudal payments and
serfdom—although on terms which transformed the landowning Junkers into
agrarian capitalists and did little for the peasants. The monarchs of most
German states conceded constitutions which left them with the power to
appoint governments, but provided for parliamentary representation for the
moneyed classes and even, in a diluted form, for the workers and peasants. The
ground was cleared for capitalist advance, even if it was capitalist advance
under monarchies which prevented the bourgeoisie itself from exercising
direct control over the state.
Germany began to undergo its own industrial revolution. Industry grew at a
rate of around 4.8 percent a year; the railways by 14 percent. Investment in the
30 years after 1850 was four times the level of the 30 years before. Coal
production rose fourfold in Prussia in 25 years, raw iron output multiplied 14-
fold, steel output rose 54-fold. The number of steam powered machines rose
by about 1,800 percent. Alfred Krupp had employed a mere 60 workers in
1836; by 1873 he employed 16,000. Although Germany’s industrialisation took
off 60 years after Britain’s, it was soon catching up.100 The Ruhr’s collieries
were larger and more intensive than those of south Wales; the German
chemical industry developed synthetic dyes long before Britain’s.
These years also saw the accelerated growth of large-scale industries in
France and, at a slower pace, in parts of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The
bourgeoisie, looking back in the late 1860s, could reflect that they might have
lost the political struggle in 1848, but they had won the economic battle. In
France they put their faith in Louis Bonaparte. In Germany they rejoiced as
Bismarck, exercising near dictatorial powers within the Prussian monarchy
fought wars against Denmark, Austria and France to build a new, unified
German Empire as the most powerful state in western Europe.
The Italian and Hungarian bourgeoisies also recovered from the defeat of
the national movements in 1848-49. At first the Austrian crown continued to
rule over Milan, Venice and Budapest, as well as Prague, Cracow and Zagreb.
But the national movements were far from destroyed. There was continuing
enthusiasm for national unity among sections of the Italian middle class and,
although few of the peasantry and urban poor shared such feelings (a bare 4
percent of the population spoke the Tuscan dialect that was to become the
Italian language), there was enormous bitterness against the king of Naples and
the Austrian rulers of Lombardy. In the late 1850s Cavour—the minister of the
king of Piedmont—sought to take advantage of these feelings. He made deals
with the radical nationalist Mazzini and the republican revolutionary
Garibaldi, on the one hand, and the governments of Britain and France on the
other. Garibaldi landed with 1,000 revolutionary ‘redshirts’ in Sicily to raise
the island in revolt against the king of Naples101 and marched north. The king
of Piedmont sent an army south and they crushed the royal army of Naples
between them, while French forces ensured the withdrawal of the Austrians
from Lombardy. Then Cavour and the king of Piedmont completed their
manoeuvre by disarming Garibaldi’s troops, forcing him into exile and gaining
the reluctant backing of the southern Italian aristocracy, who recognised ‘things
have to change if they are to remain the same’.102 The kings of Piedmont
became the kings of the whole of Italy—although the united country long
remained fractured between an increasingly modern capitalist north and an
impoverished south where landowners continued to treat the peasants in a
near-feudal manner and mafia banditry flourished.
Hungary, likewise, gained nationhood by manoeuvres at the top aimed at
incorporating the forces of rebellion below. In the 1860s the Austrian
monarchy reorganised itself following its conflicts with France and then with
Prussia. It established two parallel administrative structures. The first was run
by a German speaking government apparatus, partly responsible to a
parliament in Vienna, and ruled over Austria, the Czech lands, the Polish
region around Cracow and the Slav speaking province of Slovenia. The second
was run by a Hungarian speaking government apparatus in Budapest and ruled
over Hungary, Slovakia, the partially Romanian speaking region of
Transylvania, and the Serbo-Croat speaking provinces of Croatia and
(following conflicts with Turkey) Bosnia. The arrangement allowed it to
stabilise its rule for half a century.
Two old national movements in Europe remained completely unsatisfied,
however. In Ireland the late 1840s had seen a renaissance of the nationalism
born at the time of the French Revolution and crushed in 1798. The Great
Famine of those years revealed the horrific human cost of the damage done to
the Irish economy by its subservience to the British ruling class. A million
people died, another million were forced to emigrate, and the population was
halved. Even the dominant constitutional politician, Daniel O’Connell, who
had worked all his life for Irish Catholic rights within the ‘United Kingdom’,
was forced to raise the question of independence—while a new generation of
middle class radicals saw the need to go further, to fight for a republic. Their
attempt at a rising in 1848 was smashed. But from now on the ‘Irish question’
was to be central in British political life.
The failure to solve the Irish issue at one end of Europe was matched by
the continuing struggle of Polish nationalism at the other. The Polish nobility
had never been reconciled to the partition of the kingdom of Poland between
Russia, Prussia and Austria in the 1790s, and they led revolts against Russian
rule in the 1830s and again in the 1860s. The Polish nobles were feudal
landowners, dominating not merely the Polish but also the Byelorussian,
Ukrainian and Jewish lower classes. Yet their fight against the Russian tsar led
them into conflict with the whole counter-revolutionary structure imposed on
Europe after 1814 and again after 1848, and to find common purpose with
revolutionaries and democrats across Europe. For the British Chartists, the
French republicans and the German communists, the Polish struggle was their
struggle—and exiled Poles from noble families were to be found fighting in
Italy, southern Germany, Hungary and Paris.
Chapter 8
The American Civil War
On 12 April 1861 South Carolina volunteer soldiers opened fire on United
States federal forces in Fort Sumter, which faces the port of Charleston. They
were expressing, in the most dramatic fashion, the slave-owning Southern
states’ refusal to accept the presidency of Abraham Lincoln and the recently
formed Republican Party.
Until that moment, few people had expected the disagreement would lead
to fighting. Lincoln had only taken over the presidency a month before, and had
repeatedly said his sole concern was to preserve the newly opened territories
in the north west for ‘free labour’. His personal dislike of slavery did not
mean he favoured banning it in the Southern states. ‘I have no purpose’, he
insisted in a debate in 1858, ‘to interfere with the institutions of slavery in the
states where it exists’.103 He repeated the point during his 1861 election
campaign.104 While the Southern states were organising to break away from the
US, much of Congress’s effort went into finding a compromise which would
leave slavery in the South untouched. The abolitionist opponents of slavery
were a small minority both in Congress and among the population of the North
at large. It was quite usual for their meetings to be broken up by hostile crowds
even in Boston, regarded as their stronghold.
Three days before the bombardment of Fort Sumter the leading
abolitionists were convinced civil war was impossible and the government
would give in to the demands of the slave states. The black abolitionist
Frederick Douglass wrote, ‘All talk of putting down treason and rebellions by
force are as impotent and worthless as the words of a drunken woman in a
ditch. Slavery has touched our government’.105 Yet the shooting at Fort Sumter
began the bloodiest war in US history—costlier, in terms of American dead,
than the War of Independence, the First World War, the Second World War, the
Korean War and the Vietnam War combined.
The unbridgeable gulf
More was at stake than a simple misunderstanding. There was a clash between
fundamentally different ways of organising society.106
The US had emerged from its revolution against British rule with two
different forms of economic organisation, each catering for the growing world
market. In the North, the ‘free labour’ of small farmers, artisans and waged
workers in small workshops prevailed. The South was dominated by the
owners of the slave-owning plantations, even through the majority of its white
population were small farmers, artisans or workers without slaves of their
own.
The contrast between the ‘slave’ and the ‘free’ regions did not seem to be
an insuperable issue to the early political leaders. The regions were separated
geographically, and even Southerners like Jefferson, the half-ashamed slave-
owner who drew up the Declaration of Independence and became president in
1800, assumed that slavery was on its way out. After all, Adam Smith had
proved that ‘free’ labour would always be more efficient and profitable than
slave labour.
However, that was before the advent of large-scale cotton farming to cater
for the insatiable appetite of the Lancashire mills. In 1790 the South produced
only 1,000 tons of cotton a year. By 1860 the figure had grown to a million
tons. Gangs of slaves working under the discipline of gang masters with whips
were an efficient means of cultivating and picking the crop on a large-scale.
There were four million slaves by 1860.
But it was not only slaves the plantation owners wanted. They wanted
more land to feed the foreign demand for cotton. They got some when the US
government bought Florida from Spain and Louisiana from France. They seized
land granted to certain Indian nations (who were dumped 1,000 miles further
west in conditions of immense hardship), and they grabbed vast amounts
through war with Mexico. But even this was not enough. Now they looked to
the unsettled area between the Mississippi and the Pacific—an area far greater
than all the existing states combined.
The Northern states were also undergoing an enormous transformation by
the middle of the 19th century. Their population had expanded over and over
again as successive waves of immigrants arrived from the impoverished lands
of Europe, hoping to succeed as small farmers or well paid workers. In turn,
the growing population created a growing market for manufacturers and
merchants. The output of New England textiles grew from four million yards in
1817 to 308 million in 1837. By 1860 the country had the second highest
industrial output in the world, behind Britain but rapidly catching up. The free
population of the North looked to the territory of the west as the way to fulfil
their dreams of owning land, while the Northern capitalists looked to it as a
potentially huge area for profit-making.
The ‘transport revolution’ was making an enormous impact. Canals linked
New York to the Great Lakes and the Midwest; the Midwest, in turn, was
connected to the Gulf of Mexico by steamboats plying the Ohio, Mississippi
and Missouri. There were 30,000 miles of railways by 1860, more than in the
whole of the rest of the world. Everywhere communities which formerly
practised subsistence farming were increasingly linked to the market. The old
isolation of state from state and North from South was becoming a thing of the
past.
The question of who was to dominate the land west of the Mississippi
could not be avoided indefinitely, and other questions were connected with it.
Important sections of Northern industrial capitalism wanted tariffs to protect
their products and their markets from British capitalists. But the cotton
economy of the South was intimately tied to the British cotton industry and
resented any threat to free trade. Whose interests was the federal government
to pursue in its foreign policy?
The plantation owners got their way for the best part of half a century.
Missouri in 1820 and Texas in the 1840s entered the Union as slave states. In
the 1850s federal soldiers enforced a new law against runaway slaves, seizing
people in Northern cities such as Boston and returning them to their masters in
the South. Then in 1854 the Democratic Party president and Congress decided
slavery would prevail in Kansas and other western territories if the majority of
white settlers voted for it—in other words, if supporters of slavery from the
South could use their wealth to establish a base in these territories before free
settlers from the north east arrived.
This caused fury not just within the abolitionist movement of humanitarian
whites and free blacks which had built substantial, if minority, support in New
England, where slavery had never existed on any scale. It infuriated all those
Northerners—however infected they might be with racist ideas—who stood
for ‘free soil’, for dividing the land of the West into small farms for new
settlers. Both groups feared that the plantation owners, who controlled the
presidency, Congress and the Supreme Court, would grab the whole of the
West. This would destroy the hopes of would-be farmers, leave industrial
capital dominant in only a handful of north eastern states, and give the
plantation owners control of the government for the foreseeable future.
Kansas became the setting for a bitter mini civil war between ‘free labour’
settlers and advocates of slavery from across the border in Missouri. Across
the country opinion polarised. In the North it led to the creation of a new
political party, the Republicans, whose candidate in the 1860 presidential
election was Abraham Lincoln.
The party’s support cut across class lines. Sections of big business,
farmers, artisans and workers were bound together by the determination to
preserve the western territories for free labour. This did not mean common
opposition to racism. There was a solid core of abolitionists—including open
admirers of John Brown, who was executed in December 1859 for leading a
mixed group of black and white men in the seizure of a federal armoury
building at Harper’s Ferry in Virginia with the aim of freeing local slaves. But
there were also large numbers of people who continued to accept racist
stereotypes. Some of the ‘free labour states’ denied blacks the vote, and others
went so far as to deny blacks the right to live there. In 1860 New York, which
voted for Lincoln by a clear majority, also voted by two to one in a referendum
against giving blacks the vote on the same basis as whites.
The success of the Republican Party in the North stemmed from its ability
to make free labour rather than racism or even slavery the central issue.
Lincoln personified this approach. It was on this basis that he won 54 percent
of the vote in the Northern states and 40 percent of the vote throughout the
country. He was able to take office because of a split between the Northern and
Southern wings of the Democratic Party over the question of Kansas.
However moderate Lincoln’s stance, the plantation owners saw his
election as a threat to which they had to respond. As far as they were
concerned their whole society was at stake. If it did not expand it was doomed
—and Lincoln’s presidency doomed expansion. Some also feared that unless
they raised a storm their hold on the South as a whole might be undermined,
since two thirds of the whites owned no slaves and might be attracted to the
ideas gaining support in the North.
The seven southernmost cotton-producing states—where slaves accounted
for almost half the population—announced their secession from the United
States and began to arm. In April they took the initiative and attacked Fort
Sumter. They believed, correctly, that the outbreak of hostilities would lead
other slave-owning states to join them (which four of the seven did). But they
also thought, incorrectly, that Lincoln’s government—with only 16,000 troops
at its disposal—would cave in to their demands.
The long impasse
Civil wars have a habit of starting with small-scale clashes between irregular
forces and escalating into huge set piece confrontations. This was no
exception.
Immediately after the attack on Fort Sumter, ‘the North was galvanised by
a frenzy of patriotism by the event…Every Northern hamlet held a war
meeting’.107 States rushed to offer militia regiments to the federal government
and men to volunteer for the new army. The abolitionists suddenly found their
meetings packed with enthusiastic crowds. ‘The whole of the North is a unit,’
one Boston abolitionist reported. ‘Young and old, men and women, boys and
girls have caught the sacred enthusiasm…The times are ripening for the march
of a liberating army into the Confederate states’.108 There was something of the
feeling found in revolutions, with a sudden interest in new ideas. Newspapers
printing a statement by the anti-slavery campaigner Wendell Phillips sold
200,000 copies.109 Speakers like Frederick Douglass got an enthusiastic
reception wherever they went.110 Huge audiences, many of whom would
previously have regarded the involvement of women in politics as an outrage,
listened spellbound to speeches by a 19 year old abolitionist, Anna
Dickinson.111
Yet for 18 months the conduct of the war by the North was in contradiction
to this near-revolutionary mood. Lincoln believed, rightly or wrongly, that the
only way to hold the North together behind the war was to bend over
backwards to conciliate moderate opinion. He conciliated the Northern
Democrats, people who had no objection to slavery but wanted a united
country, and the leaders of three border states—Maryland, Delaware and
Kentucky—which had a relatively low level of slave ownership and had
chosen to stay in the Union. He appointed moderates to key positions in the
government. He gave command of the Northern army, after it had suffered a
serious defeat in the summer (the Battle of Bull Run), to a Democrat and
supporter of Southern slavery, McClellan. He rescinded an order by the
commander on the western front, Fremont, for the emancipation of all slaves in
Missouri. He even indicated that slaves who ran away to the Unionist armies
(known as ‘contrabands’) should be returned to their Confederate masters
providing they had not been involved in military labour.
It soon became clear that a moderate policy was not going to win the war.
McClellan followed an ultra-cautious policy, centred on building up a large
army in the Washington area and then trying to break through to the nearby
Confederate capital of Richmond. It fitted the politics of those who merely
wanted to force the secessionist states back into the Union without changing
their social system. But as a military policy it was completely unsuccessful.
Eighteen months into the war the battle lines were essentially the same as at the
beginning, except for Northern victories along the Mississippi, and the South
was still in control of a territory the size of France. There was growing
demoralisation in the North, with a feeling that victory was impossible even
among some of its most fervent supporters.112
But the sense that the war was going nowhere also created a new audience
for the abolitionists. They pointed out that the South had four million slaves to
do its manual work and so could mobilise much of the free male population for
the war. By contrast, the North was having increasing difficulties in filling the
ranks of its army. They argued Lincoln should undercut the economy of the
South by a declaration of freedom for the slaves, and strengthen the North’s
forces by enrolling black soldiers.
The abolitionist Wendell Phillips railed against Lincoln’s policy in a
famous speech:
I do not say that McClellan is a traitor; but I say that if he were a traitor he
would have to behave exactly as he had done. Have no fear for Richmond;
McClellan will not take it. If the war is continued in this fashion, without a
rational aim, then it is a useless squandering of blood and gold…Lincoln…is a
first rate second rate man.113
The reluctant revolutionaries
The speech caused a furore and led to bitter attacks on Phillips. But it
crystallised a growing feeling that only revolutionary methods would work.
Despite McClellan’s conservatism, radical army commanders were already
beginning to resort to some of these methods—welcoming escaped slaves to
their camps and taking away the property, including the slaves, of ‘rebels’ in
areas occupied by the Northern armies. Then, at a decisive moment, Lincoln
himself made a series of radical moves—raising the first black regiment,
declaring freedom for slaves in all states still in revolt, and dismissing
McClellan.
The ground was cleared for a new approach that would lead to victory,
although not for another two years. The defeat of a Confederate army at
Gettysburg in the summer of 1863 still left the South with a vast territory.
Unionist generals such as Grant and Sherman could see that it would only be
taken by an all-out war directed not just against its armies but against the
social structure which sustained them. The final defeat of the Confederacy
came only after Sherman’s troops made their famous march through Georgia,
looting, burning plantations and freeing slaves.
The shift from McClellan’s approach in the first year and a half of the war
to Grant’s and Sherman’s at its end was as great as the shift in France from the
methods of the Girondins to those of the Jacobins. Lincoln himself was very
different in character and approach to Robespierre, and Grant and Sherman
were conservative-minded professional soldiers. What they came to see,
however, was that revolution had to be imposed on the South if the society
which existed in the North was going to prevail.
Karl Marx noted how Lincoln was driven to make revolutionary moves
without even being aware of it:
Lincoln is a sui generis [unique] figure in the annals of history. He has no
initiative, no idealistic impetus, no historical trappings. He gives his most
important utterances the most commonplace form. Other people claim to be
‘fighting for an idea’, when it is a matter for them of fighting for square feet of
land. Lincoln, even when he is motivated by an ideal, talks about square feet…
Lincoln is not the product of a popular revolution. This…average person of
good will was placed at the top by the interplay of the forces of universal
suffrage unaware of the great issues at stake. The new world has never
achieved a greater triumph than by this demonstration that, given its social and
political organisation, ordinary people of good will can achieve feats which
only the heroes could achieve in the old world.114
Reconstruction and betrayal
There was, nevertheless, a contradiction in the established bourgeois society
of the North, with its own deep class antagonisms, imposing revolutionary
change on the South. This was shown in the immediate aftermath of the
Northern victory, and Lincoln’s assassination, in the spring of 1865. A split
opened up within the political establishment. Lincoln’s vice-president and
successor, Andrew Johnson, followed a policy of conciliating the defeated
states. He pushed for them to be allowed back into the Union—and given a
position of great influence in Congress—with no change in their social
structure apart from the formal abolition of slavery. Given that the plantation
owners retained great wealth and most of the former slaves had no land, the
result was bound to be a virtual return to the situation before the war.
Johnson immediately ran into opposition from northern blacks and
abolitionists, from radical Republican congressmen influenced by the wave of
revolutionary democratic feeling generated by the war, and from some of the
army officers occupying the South. The opposition soon also included
mainstream Republican politicians who did not want the near 100 percent
Democratic states back in Congress, industrial capitalists still determined to
hegemonise the western territories, and ‘get rich quick’ businessmen who had
descended on the South in the wake of the northern armies (the so-called
carpetbaggers). This coalition was strong enough to defeat Johnson’s schemes
(it came only one vote short of impeaching him in Congress), win the
presidential election for the Republican candidate Grant in 1868, and enforce
‘reconstruction’ on the South for the best part of a decade.
In these years, Northern arms kept the old planters from controlling state or
local governments. Southern Republicans took their place, black as well as
white. Freed slaves were given the vote and used it. Blacks held positions as
judges and in state governments. There were 20 black Federal congressmen
and two black senators. For the first time, Southern legislatures took education
seriously, opening networks of schools for poor white and black children
alike. The plantocracy fought back, encouraging the Ku Klux Klan to terrorise
blacks who took advantage of their new rights and whites who aided them.
There were killings, like the massacre of 46 blacks and two white
sympathisers in Memphis, Tennessee, in May 1866. But so long as the Northern
army occupied the South, the terror could not destroy gains which blacks were
determined to hold on to. After all, 200,000 blacks had been in the Union army,
and they knew how to fight.
However, precisely because it was a bourgeois army of occupation, there
was one thing the army could not do—confiscate land to provide the freed
slaves with a way of making a living independent of the old masters. Sherman
had briefly carried through such a measure, giving land to 40,000 ex-slaves,
only to see it overturned by Johnson. From then on, the only land available to
former slaves was government-owned land, which was often of inferior
quality. Most were forced to rely on the former slave-owners, working as
sharecroppers or labourers for them. What had been an oppressed slave class
became, for the most part, an oppressed peasant and labouring class.
This was not the worst of it. By the mid-1870s the Northern capitalists felt
they had achieved their goal in the South. Radical reconstruction had prevented
any renaissance of planter power to rival to their own. Their industries were
expanding at a speed which would soon lead them to overtake Britain. Their
railways now stretched all the way to the Pacific coast. There was no
possibility of the South dominating the western territories and they no longer
saw any need for an army of occupation, since whoever ran the South would
do so as their junior partner.
The withdrawal of the Northern army left a free hand for the Klan and
other racist forces. Racist terror on the one hand and economic power on the
other allowed the big landowners to re-establish their political control. They
first restricted and then abolished black (and often also poor white) suffrage
throughout most of the South, established formal segregation in every area of
social life, and created an atmosphere of racial antagonism which prevented
poor whites (the majority of the white population) engaging in joint economic,
social or political struggle alongside blacks. Occasionally an upsurge of
bitterness at their lot would lead some poor whites to break through the racist
ideological barrier—in the ‘populist’ movement of the 1880s and 1890s, and
in the upsurge of trade unionism in the 1930s and 1940s. But on each occasion
the white oligarchy knew how to unleash racial hatred and re-establish the
divide. Ninety years after the Emancipation Proclamation of January 1863,
blacks were still prevented from exercising their civil rights—and the Federal
government in Washington still showed no interest in the matter.
Northern capital gained mightily from the civil war. There was a brief
period in which it seemed the ex-slaves would also benefit. But after helping
to destroy one form of oppression, modern industrial capitalism showed it had
every interest in establishing another. Racism was integral to its operations as
well as to that of the old slave-owners, and the main party of industrial capital,
the Republican Party, soon forgot its slogans of the 1860s.
Chapter 9
The conquest of the East
The splendours of the Orient still had an allure for west Europeans in 1776,
when Adam Smith published his Wealth of Nations. Textiles, porcelain and tea
from India and China were sought after in the west, and intellectuals like
Voltaire115 treated the civilisations of the East as at least on a par with those of
Britain, France and Germany. Adam Smith called China ‘one of the richest…
best cultivated, most industrious…nations of the world…Though it may stand
still, it does not go backwards’.116 A century later the picture was very
different. The racist stereotypes applied to the indigenous peoples of Africa
and North America were now used for those of India, China and the Middle
East.117 In the intervening period Britian had seized virtually the whole of
India as a colony and humiliated China in two wars, France had conquered
Algeria, and Russia and Austria-Hungary had torn chunks off the Ottoman
Empire. The development of capitalism which had turned the societies of
western Europe and the United States upside down now allowed the rulers of
those societies to grab control of the rest of the world.
Britain’s Indian Empire
India was the first of the great empires to fall into western hands. This did not
happen overnight, as a result of straightforward military conquest, nor was it
simply the result of technological superiority.
Western commentators in the mid-19th century (including Marx) were
mistaken to believe that India was characterised by ‘age-old’ stagnation. Even
after the collapse of the Mogul Empire there had been some continuation of
economic development with the ‘growing wealth of merchants, bankers and
tax-farmers’.118 But these lived in the shadow of six warring kingdoms, none of
which allowed them a decisive say over its policies or even provided real
security for their property. This opened the door to the intervention of the
British East India Company, with its troops and its arms. Many merchants saw
it as able to protect their interests in a way Indian rulers would not.
At the beginning of the 18th century the Company had still been a marginal
force in the sub-continent. It relied on concessions from Indian rulers for its
trading posts along the coast. But over time it established increasingly strong
ties with the Indian merchants who sold it textiles and other goods from the
interior. Then in the 1750s a Company official, Robert Clive, played one
claimant to power in Bengal off against a rival, defeated a French force and
gained control of the province—which was by far the wealthiest part of the old
Mogul Empire. The Company collected the taxes and ran the government
administration, while an Indian nawab continued to hold the formal regalia of
office. Britain had gained the beginnings of a new empire in India just as it was
losing its old empire in North America, and had done so at little cost to itself.
The Company aimed to cover all its costs from taxing the Indian population
and relied on an army made up overwhelmingly of ‘Sepoy’ Indian troops.
The success in Bengal led to success elsewhere. Other Indian rulers saw
the Company as a useful ally, and used it to train their troops and regularise
their administrations. Indian merchants welcomed its increased influence, as it
bought growing quantities of textiles from them and helped guarantee their
property against inroads by Indian rulers. The Company further cemented its
power by creating a new class of large-scale landowners out of sections of the
old zamindars.
It was not difficult for the British to consolidate their position further,
when necessary, by dispensing with obdurate local rulers and establishing
direct Company rule.
By 1850 a policy of conquering some rulers and buying off others had
extended the area of British domination throughout the whole sub-continent.
The Marathas were conquered in 1818, Sind in 1843, the Sikhs in 1849 and
Oudh in 1856. British ministers boasted that the Company’s approach was
modelled on the Roman principle of divide et impera—divide and rule. Using
bribery in some instances and violence in others, it played ruler off against
ruler, kingdom against kingdom, privileged class against privileged class,
caste against caste, and religion against religion, finding local allies wherever
it moved. This enabled it to conquer an empire of 200 million people with ‘a
native army of 200,000 men, officered by Englishmen and…kept in check by
an English army numbering only 40,000’.119
Enormous wealth flowed to the Company’s agents. Clive left India with
£234,000 in loot—equivalent to many millions today—and governor-general
Warren Hastings was notorious for taking huge bribes. This wealth was
created by the mass of peasants. The cultivators of Bengal and Bihar paid out
£2 million a year in taxes. The Company called its officials ‘collectors’ and
applied the same methods of extortion as the Moguls had done, but more
efficiently and with more devastating consequences.
This ensured that the poverty which had afflicted the mass of people in the
late Mogul period now grew worse. Crop failures in 1769 were followed by
famines and epidemics which cost up to ten million lives. An area which had
stunned Europeans with its wealth only half a century earlier was now on its
way to becoming one of the poorest in the world.
None of this worried the nawabs, maharajahs, merchants or zamindars
who supped from the company’s table. They grew fat as it grew fat. But they
soon discovered the hard way that their partnership with the British was not
one of equals. The Company which raised up local rulers could also throw
them down without a second thought.
Control of the Company lay in Britain, however much Indian merchants
might benefit from its trading connections. This was shown dramatically in the
first decades of the 19th century. The mechanisation of the Lancashire cotton
mills suddenly enabled them to produce cloth more cheaply than India’s
handicraft industry. Instead of India’s products playing a central role in British
markets, British cloth took over India’s markets, destroying much of the Indian
textile industry, devastating the lives of millions of textile workers, and
damaging the profits of the Indian merchants. Without a government of their
own, they had no means to protect their interests as the country underwent de-
industrialisation and British capitalists displaced them from areas of profit
making like shipbuilding and banking. Meanwhile the thin, highly privileged
stratum of British officials became more arrogant, more bullying, more
condescending, more rapacious and more racist.
They reaped the consequences of their behaviour in 1857. The Company’s
Sepoy Indian troops turned on their officers after they ignored the troops’
religious convictions, ordering them to use cartridges greased with beef fat
(anathema to Hindus) and pork fat (anathema to Muslims). The issue became a
focus for the bitterness felt across India at the behaviour of white sahibs.
Within weeks mutineers had seized control of a huge swathe of northern India,
killing those British officers and officials they could lay their hands on and
besieging the remainder in a few isolated fortified posts. Hindus and Sikhs
forgot any animosity towards Muslims, installing an heir of the Moguls as
emperor in the historic capital of Delhi.
The rising was eventually crushed. A panicking government rushed British
troops to the sub-continent, and officers succeeded in persuading Indian
soldiers in Madras and Bombay to put down the mutineers in the north. The
most savage measures were then used to deter any future threat of mutiny.
However, the government saw that repression alone could not pacify India.
There had to be some control over the rapacity of British business if it was not
to kill the goose that laid the golden egg, and more emphasis had to be put on
divide and rule—institutionalising communal and religious divisions even if it
meant dropping attempts to make Indian social behaviour accord with
bourgeois norms. Direct rule from Britain replaced that of the East India
Company, Queen Victoria was proclaimed Empress of India, and every effort
was made to bind local Indian rulers and landowners into the imperial system.
But if the administration was regularised, the impoverishment of the mass
of people continued. The proportion of the population dependent upon
agriculture for a living rose from 50 percent to 75 percent.120 While 25 percent
of the tax revenues went on paying for the army to keep the Indians down,
education, public health and agriculture got a bare 1 percent each.121 Famines
swept the country. Over a million people died in the 1860s, three and a half
million in the 1870s, and as many as ten million in the 1890s.122
Meanwhile there were secure careers, paid for out of the taxes on the
peasants, for the sons of the British upper middle class—in the senior ranks of
the Indian army and newly formed civil service. They brought over their wives
and created the snob-ridden, racist enclaves described in Kipling’s Plain
Tales from the Hills, Forster’s Passage to India, Orwell’s Burmese Days and
Paul Scott’s Jewel in the Crown.
The British sahibs despised those they called ‘natives’. But they still
relied on certain of them to control the mass of the population. The old rajahs
or maharajahs remained in palaces, rebuilt in ever more luxurious fashion,
along with their numerous wives, servants, horses, elephants and hunting dogs
—sometimes even nominally ruling (most famously in Hyderabad), but in
practice getting their orders from British ‘advisers’. Dotted across the
countryside of the north, the zamindars lived in a lesser luxury of their own,
dominating the peasantry and reliant on the British, even if they occasionally
moaned about their own status. Then there were the village brahmins and
headmen who would help the British collect their taxes, and the zamindars
their rents. All of them manipulated old caste (or religious) divisions to gain
leverage for themselves in negotiations with those above them and to aid their
exploitation of those below—so that by the end of the 19th century caste ties
were generally more systematised than at the beginning. At the same time a
new middle class was emerging, whose members hoped for advance as
lawyers, clerks or civil servants within the structures of British rule, but found
their hopes continually frustrated by racial barriers.
The subjection of China
China avoided being absorbed like India into a European empire. Yet the fate
of the mass of its people was hardly more enviable.
The wealth of China had excited the greed of western merchants from the
time of Marco Polo in the 13th century. But they faced a problem. While China
produced many things Europeans wanted, Europe did not produce much the
Chinese wanted. The British East India Company set out to rectify this by
turning wide areas of the newly conquered lands in India over to the
cultivation of a product that creates its own demand—opium. By 1810 it was
selling 325,000 kilos of the drug a year through Canton, and soon turned
China’s centuries old trade surplus into a deficit. When Chinese officials tried
to halt the flow of opium, Britain went to war in 1839 for the right to create
addiction.
Chinese officialdom ruled over an empire older and more populous than
any in the world. The country had only ever been conquered by nomad hordes
from the north. Its rulers expected to be able to defeat a seaborne challenge
from a country more than 7,000 miles away easily. They did not realise that
economic developments at the other end of Eurasia—developments which
owed an enormous debt to Chinese innovation in centuries past—had given
rise to a country more powerful than anyone had ever imagined.
A memo to the emperor from a leading official predicted easy victory:
The English barbarians are an insignificant and detestable race, trusting to their
strong ships and big guns; the immense distances they have traversed will
render the arrival of seasonable supplies impossible, and their soldiers, after a
single defeat…will become dispirited and lost.123
But after three years of intermittent fighting and negotiations it was the
Chinese who acceded to British terms—opening a number of ports to the
opium trade, paying an indemnity, ceding the island of Hong Kong and granting
extra-territorial rights to British subjects. It was not long before the British
decided these concessions were insufficient. They launched a second war in
1857, when 5,000 troops laid siege to Canton and forced a further opening up
of trade. Still dissatisfied, they then joined with the French to march 20,000
troops to Beijing and burn the summer palace.
China scholars disagree about the reasons for the easy British victories.
Some ascribe them to superior weaponry and warships, a product of industrial
advance.124 Others stress the internal weaknesses of the Manchu state, claiming
the difference between the industrial levels of the two countries was not yet
enough to explain the victory.125 But there is no dispute about the outcome. The
concessions gained by Britain weakened the Chinese state’s ability to control
trade and to prevent a growing outflow of the silver it used for currency. There
was an escalating debilitation of industry and agriculture alike. The defeats
also opened the door to demands for similar concessions from other powers,
until European states had extra-territorial enclaves or ‘concessions’ (in effect,
mini-colonies) all along the Chinese coast.
The suffering of the peasantry from the decay of the Manchu Empire was
intensified by the foreign inroads into it. Conditions became intolerable,
especially in the less fertile mountainous areas on the borders between
provinces. China’s peasants reacted as they had always done in such
circumstances in the past. They joined dissident religious sects and rose up
against their masters. What followed is normally called the ‘T’ai-p’ing
rebellion’. In fact it was a full-blooded revolutionary assault on the power of
the state.
The movement began among peasants, labourers and a few impoverished
intellectuals in southern China in the mid-1840s. Its leader was Hung Hsiu-
ch’uan, a school teacher from a peasant family, who saw himself in a vision as
the brother of Jesus, commanded by God to destroy demons on Earth and
establish a ‘Heavenly Kingdom’ of ‘Great Peace’ (T’ai-p’ing in Chinese). He
preached a doctrine of strict equality between people, equal division of the
land, communal ownership of goods and an end to old social distinctions,
including those which subjugated women to men. His followers had a sense of
purpose and discipline which enabled them to attract ever-greater support and
to defeat the armies sent against them. By 1853 the movement, now two million
strong, was able to take the former imperial capital of Nanking and run about
40 percent of the country as a state of its own.
The egalitarian ideals of the movement did not last. The high command
was soon behaving like a new imperial court, as Hung began ‘a life of excess
—high living, luxury and many concubines’.126 In the countryside
impoverished half-starved peasants still had to pay taxes, even if at a slightly
lower rate than before.
The T’ai-p’ing leadership’s abandonment of its ideals followed the pattern
of previous peasant revolts in China. Illiterate peasants working land
dispersed across vast areas were not a compact enough force to exercise
control over an army and its leaders. Those leaders soon discovered the
material resources simply did not exist to fulfil their visionary ideals of plenty
for all. The easy option was to fall into the traditional way of ruling and the
traditional privileges which went with it.
But in the last stage of the rebellion there were signs of something new.
Effective leadership passed to a cousin of Hung’s who began to frame a
programme which did imply a break with traditional ways, although not a
return to egalitarian ideals. He pushed for the ‘modernisation’ of China’s
economy through the adoption of western techniques—the opening of banks,
building of railways and steamships, promotion of mining, and encouragement
of science and technology. This suggests that the T’ai-p’ing rebellion had
forces within it which could perhaps have broken with the pattern of past
peasant revolts and swept away the social obstacles behind so much of the
country’s poverty. But these forces had no time to develop. A reorganised
imperial army financed by Chinese merchants, provided with modern weapons
by Britain and France and assisted by foreign troops under a Major Gordon
began to push its way up the Yangtze. Nanking finally fell, with 100,000 dead,
in 1864.127
Western capitalist states had helped stabilise the old, pre-capitalist order
in China, allowing it to survive another 50 years. By doing so, they helped
ensure that, while western Europe and North American advanced
economically, China went backwards.
The Eastern Question
The pattern was very similar in the third great Eastern empire, the Ottoman
Empire. This vast multinational empire had dominated an enormous area for
400 years—all of north Africa, Egypt and what is now the Sudan, the Arabian
peninsula, Palestine, Syria and Iraq, Asia Minor and a huge swathe of Europe,
including all the Balkans and, at times, Hungary and Slovakia. It was ruled by
Turkish emperors based in Istanbul, and there was a Turkish landowning class
in Asia Minor and parts of the Balkans. But much of the empire was run by the
upper classes of the conquered non-Turkish peoples—Greeks in much of the
Balkans, Arabs in the Middle East, and the descendants of the pre-Ottoman
mamluke rulers in Egypt. In Istanbul the various religious groups—orthodox
Christians, Syriac Christians, Jews and so on—had structures of self
government, subject to overall collaboration with the sultan’s rule. Even the
army was not exclusively Turkish. Its core was made up of janissaries—
originally children from Balkan Christian families taken at a young age to
Istanbul, nominally as slaves, and trained as hardened fighters.
The wealth of the empire, like that of all the societies of its time, came
overwhelmingly from peasant agriculture. But the Ottomans had long traded
both with western Europe (through Russia and Scandinavia via the rivers
which fed into the Black Sea and Caspian Sea, and through southern Europe
via trade with Venice and Genoa) and India and China (via overland routes
such as the ‘silk road’ which ran north of Afghanistan, and through ports on the
Red Sea and Persian Gulf). Until the mid-18th century, at least, there were
slow but steady advances both in agriculture (the spread of new crops like
coffee and cotton) and handicraft industry.
However, by the beginning of the 19th century the Ottoman Empire was
increasingly under pressure from outside. Napoleon had conquered Egypt until
driven out by British troops, and in 1830 the French monarchy seized Algeria
in the face of bitter local resistance. Russian forces conquered much of the
Caucasus and the Black Sea coast, and set their sights on Istanbul itself. Serbs
rebelled against Turkish rule and set up an autonomous kingdom in 1815, and
Greeks carved out a state with British and Russian help in the 1820s. The
Russian tsars encouraged similar movements elsewhere, posing as the
‘protectors’ of ethnic groups speaking languages similar to their own and
belonging to the same Orthodox branch of Christianity.
The Russian advance began to frighten the rulers of western Europe, even
when they still relied—as did Austria and Prussia—on Russia’s armies to
crush revolution in their own lands. Their desire to maintain the Ottoman
Empire as a barrier to Russian expansion dominated European diplomacy right
up to the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, and became known as ‘the
Eastern Question’.
British governments were in the forefront of these efforts. Propping up the
Ottoman rulers allowed them not only to check Russian power—which they
saw as a threat to their own rule in northern India—but also ensured the
Ottomans allowed British goods free access to markets in the Middle East and
the Balkans.
The importance of this was shown in Egypt. Power in the country (together
with adjacent areas of Syria, Lebanon and Palestine) had passed to a ‘Pasha’
of Albanian origin, Mohammed (or Mehmet) Ali, in 1805. He ruled in the
name of the Ottoman sultan, but was in effect a ruler in his own right until
1840. He saw that industry was rapidly becoming the key to power and set
about using the state to begin an industrial revolution in Egypt. He established
state monopolies, bought modern textile machinery from Europe and employed
skilled Europeans to show Egyptians how to use it. He also had iron and steel
furnaces built, seized land from mamluke landowners and produced cash crops
for export. The result was that by the 1830s the country had the fifth highest
number of cotton spindles per head in the world and up to 70,000 people
working in modern factories.128
But Mohammed Ali’s experiment was brought to a sudden halt in 1840.
Britain sent its navy to help the Ottoman Empire reimpose its control over
Egypt, shelling Egyptian-controlled ports on the Lebanese coast and landing
troops in Syria. Mohammed Ali was forced to cut his army (which had
provided a protected market for his textile factories), dismantle his
monopolies and accept British-imposed ‘free trade policies’. A cynical Lord
Palmerston admitted, ‘To subjugate Mohammed Ali to Great Britain could be
wrong and biased. But we are biased; the vital interests of Europe require that
we should be so’.129 The rulers of Europe’s most advanced industrial power
were quite happy to impose policies which prevented the development of
industrial capitalism elsewhere. Egypt experienced de-industrialisation over
the next decades, just as China and India did—and then faced occupation by
British troops when Mohammed Ali’s successors could not pay their debts.
Egypt had at least attempted to industrialise. There were few such attempts
elsewhere in the Ottoman Empire, and the unimpeded access of cheap goods to
their markets damned these to failure. This also applied to similar attempts in
the Iranian Empire, which was sandwiched between the Ottomans, British
India and tsarist Russia.
Chapter 10
The Japanese exception
One part, and one part alone, of the non-European world managed to escape
the stagnation or decline that beset the rest of Asia, Africa and Latin America
and much of eastern Europe in the 19th century. This was Japan.
Over the previous thousand years the much older civilisation of China had
influenced the country’s developments—its technology, its alphabet, its
literature and one of its main religions. But in one important respect Japan
differed from China. It neither had the great canals and irrigation works of
China nor a strongly centralised state. Until around 1600 it had an economic
and political system very much like that of medieval Europe. There was a
weak emperor, but real power lay with great territorial lords, each of whom
presided over armed samurai (roughly equivalent to medieval Europe’s
knights) who directly exploited the peasants and fought in their lord’s army
against other samurai.
At the beginning of the 17th century one of the great lordly families, the
Tokugawa, succeeded in defeating and subduing the others. Its head became the
‘Shogun’, the real ruler of the country, although the emperor remained as a
figurehead. The other lords were forced to spend much of their time at the
Shoguns’ capital, Edo (present day Tokyo), leaving their families there as
hostages for their good behaviour. The Shoguns banned guns, which had played
a devastating role in the last great wars of the previous period (although the
samurai continued to exist and to carry arms, a right denied peasants, artisans
and merchants). They also tried to prevent any foreign influences undermining
their rule. They forbade all foreign trade, except by Dutch and Chinese vessels,
which were allowed into one port under strict supervision. They banned all
foreign books, and they deployed savage repression against the many thousands
of converts to Catholic Christianity.
These measures succeeded in bringing the bloody wars of the previous
period to an end. But the Shoguns could not stop the society beneath them
continuing to change. The concentration of the lords and their families in Edo
led to a growing trade in rice to feed them and their retainers, and to a
proliferation of urban craftspeople and traders catering to their needs. Japan’s
cities grew to be some of the biggest in the world. The merchant class,
although supposedly of very low standing, became increasingly important, and
a new urban culture of popular poetry, plays and novels developed, different in
many ways from the official culture of the state. A relaxation of the ban on
western books after 1720 led to some intellectuals showing an interest in
western ideas, and a ‘School of Dutch learning’ began to undertake studies in
science, agronomy and Copernican astronomy. As money became increasingly
important, many of the samurai became poor, forced to sell their weapons and
to take up agriculture or crafts in order to pay their debts. Meanwhile repeated
famines hit the peasantry—almost a million died in 1732 (out of a population
of 26 million), 200,000 in 1775, and several hundred thousands in the 1780s—
and there were a succession of local peasant uprisings.130 The Tokugawa
political superstructure remained completely intact. But beneath it social
forces were developing with some similarities to those in western Europe
during the Renaissance period.
Such was the background in 1853 when a Commander Perry of the US
Navy arrived off the coast with four warships to demand the Japanese
government opened the country to foreign trade. The whole ruling layer in
society was thrown into turmoil. The Tokugawa government looked at the
balance of military weaponry and decided things could no longer continue in
the old way—it had to make concessions if it was to avoid the sort of defeats
China had just suffered in the Opium Wars. But for other sections of the ruling
class the old ways were sacrosanct, and any concessions to foreigners were a
betrayal of the highest ideals. Caught between them, groups of lower samurai
formed an association committed ‘to revere the emperor and repel
barbarians’131 by militant, even revolutionary means. At one level, their
demands were deeply traditional—they looked to restore to the emperor the
power which his predecessors had not enjoyed for hundreds of years. But
some samurai understood that there had to be thoroughgoing changes in
Japanese society if it was to be capable of matching the economic and military
strength of the ‘barbarians’.
Their chance to achieve their aims came with the ‘Meiji Revolution’ of the
late 1860s, when two of the great feudal lords attacked the Tokugawa Shogun
with samurai support and formed a new government in the name of the
emperor.
This was a revolution from above. Its slogans were traditionalist and the
condition of the mass of people was not improved one iota by the change. But
those leading it understood they had to go forward to capitalism if they were
going to maintain anything of the past. They abolished the power of the rival
feudal lords, making them dependent on the state for their privileges. They did
away with the old distinctions of rank between samurai, peasants, merchants
and artisans. The incomes samurai used to enjoy from exploitation of the
peasantry now went straight to the state; any samurai who wanted more than a
minimal livelihood had to look to employment with the state or private firms.
Most importantly, the government embarked upon setting up new industries,
under its control and subsidised out of taxation. When these were strong
enough to stand on their own feet, it handed them over to merchant or banking
families with close connections to the state.
The Meiji Revolution was doubly significant for the future development of
capitalism, not just in Japan but internationally. It showed that the initiative in
opening society to full-blooded capitalist relations of production did not have
to come from the bourgeoisie. What the ‘middling elements’ had achieved in
the English Revolution or the Jacobin section of the ‘bourgeoisie’ had achieved
in the French Revolution was carried through in Japan by sections of the old
exploiting classes.
It also showed that the state could substitute for an absent industrial
capitalist class when it came to building industry and enforcing the new
capitalist forms of work. A fully formed class of industrial capitalist
entrepreneurs did emerge in Japan, but only after the state had succeeded in
building up industry through the exploitation of wage labour in modern
factories. The Japanese path to capitalism, rather than the British or French,
was to typify much of the world in the century that followed.
Meanwhile, the newly born Japanese capitalism was able to show its
strength 27 years after the Meiji Revolution by launching a war of its own
against China. The victim of foreign interventions had turned into one of the
oppressor nations.
Chapter 11
Storming heaven: The Paris Commune
By the beginning of the 1870s the new capitalist order was well on its way to
global domination. It reigned supreme in the US and through most of western
Europe—and these in turn were dictating terms to the rest of the world. Even
the Russian tsar had felt compelled to end serfdom in 1861, although he gave
half the land to the old feudal class and left the peasantry very much at its
mercy. Everywhere the world was being turned upside down.
But events in Paris soon showed that the turning did not need to cease once
capitalism was on top. Marx and Engels had written in The Communist
Manifesto that ‘the bourgeoisie produces its own gravedigger’. On 18 March
1871 the French bourgeoisie discovered how true this could be.
Four years earlier Louis Napoleon had displayed the splendour of his
empire to the monarchs of Europe in a ‘Great Exhibition’, centred on a vast
elliptical glass building 482 metres long, with a dome so high ‘that one had to
use a machine to reach it’.132
He seemed to have something to celebrate. France had undergone
enormous capitalist development since he had overthrown the republic in
1851. Industrial production had doubled as modern industries had grown, and
old handicraft production had fallen more than ever under the control of
putting-out capitalists who treated the workers much as they would in a factory.
But the emperor’s own power was not as secure as it appeared. It
depended on a balancing act. He played rival groups in the ruling class off
against one another, and tried to bolster his postion by emulating the exploits of
the first Napoleon through military adventures in Italy and Mexico (where he
attempted to impose a French nominee, Maximilian, as emperor). None of this
could prevent the growth of opposition to his rule. Sections of the bourgeoisie
turned bitter as speculation damaged them and filled the pockets of a coterie of
financiers close to the emperor. The adventure in Mexico turned into a debacle
as Maximilian was executed by a firing squad. Parisian workers, who
remembered the massacres of 1848, hated the regime as the cost of living rose
ahead of wages. Louis Bonaparte’s own leading official, Haussmann, noted
that over the half the population of Paris lived in ‘poverty verging on
destitution’ even though they laboured 11 hours a day.133 By 1869 the
republican opposition was sweeping the board in elections in Paris and other
big cities. Then in July 1870 Louis Bonaparte allowed the Prussian leader
Bismarck to provoke him into declaring war.
The French forces suffered a devastating defeat at the battle of Sedan.
Louis Bonaparte was completely discredited, and abdicated. Power fell into
the hands of the bourgeois republican opposition. But the Prussian army was
soon besieging Paris, and Bismarck insisted on punitive terms—a huge
financial payment and the handing of French Alsace-Lorraine to Prussia.
Paris held out through five months of siege in conditions of incredible
hardship, with people forced to eat dogs and rats to survive, without fuel to
warm their homes in sub-zero temperatures. The workers, artisans and their
families bore the brunt of the suffering as prices soared.134 They also bore the
brunt of defending the city. They poured into the National Guard, raising its
size to 350,000—and, by electing their own officers, they did away with its
middle class character. Their resistance was soon worrying the republican
government as much as the Prussians were. The descendants of the sans-
culottes of 1792, the children of the fighters of 1848, were armed again. ‘Red’
clubs and revolutionary newspapers flourished, reminding the workers and
artisans of how the bourgeois republicans had treated them in 1848. As Karl
Marx wrote, ‘Paris armed was the revolution armed.’
The republican government had succeeded in putting down one left wing
attempt to overthrow it on 31 October. It just managed to beat back another on
22 January, using regular troops from Brittany to shoot a crowd from the
working class area of Belleville. It was terrified it would not succeed next
time. The vice-president, Favre, saw ‘civil war only a few yards away, famine
a few hours’,135 and decided there was only one way to protect his
government. On the night of 23 January he secretly crossed the Prussian lines
to discuss terms for a French surrender.
The news caused anger among the poor of Paris. They had suffered for five
months for nothing. Then the republican government called elections, at a mere
eight days notice, to confirm the decision to surrender. As in 1848, the Paris
left had no time to campaign in the rural constituencies where the great bulk of
the electorate still lived, and priests and rich landowners were able to
exercise a decisive influence over the vote. Of the 675 deputies returned, 400
were monarchists. The bitterness in Paris grew greater still. The betrayal of
the siege was being followed by the betrayal of the republic. Then came a third
betrayal, the appointment as head of government of 71 year old August Thiers.
He now claimed to be a ‘moderate republican’, but he had first made his name
by crushing a republican rising in 1834.
For the moment the Parisian masses kept their arms, while the regular army
was disbanded under the terms of the agreement with the Prussians. What is
more, large numbers of the affluent middle classes took the opportunity to get
away from Paris, leaving the National Guard more than ever as a working
class body.
Thiers knew a clash with the Parisian masses was inevitable. He
recognised they controlled the arms of the National Guard, including 200
cannon, and sent regular soldiers to seize these from the heights of Montmartre.
While the soldiers were waiting for horses to move the guns, local people
began to argue with them. As Lissagaray recounts, ‘The women…did not wait
for the men. They surrounded the machine guns, saying, “This is shameful, what
are you doing?”’136 While the soldiers stood, not knowing how to react, a
group of 300 National Guards marched past, sounding drums to rouse the
population to resistance. As National Guards, women and children surrounded
the soldiers, one of the generals, Lecomte, three times gave an order to shoot at
the crowd. ‘His men stood still. The crowd advanced, fraternised with them,
and Lecomte and his officers were arrested’.137
By three in the afternoon of that day, 18 March, Thiers and his government
had fled the capital. One of the world’s great cities was in the hands of armed
workers, and this time they were not going to hand it over to a group of middle
class politicians.
A new sort of power
The armed masses exercised power at first through the elected leaders of the
National Guard—its ‘central committee’. But these were determined not to do
anything which could be construed as heading a dictatorship. They organised
elections for a new elected body, the Commune, based on universal male
suffrage in each locality. Unlike normal parliamentary representatives, those
elected were to be subject to immediate recall by their electors and to receive
no more than the average wage of a skilled worker. What is more, the elected
representatives would not simply pass laws which a hierarchy of highly paid
bureaucratic officials would be expected to implement, they were to make sure
their own measures were put into effect.
In effect, as Karl Marx pointed out in his defence of the Commune, The
Civil War in France, they dismantled the old state and replaced it with a new
structure of their own, more democratic than any since the rise of class society:
Instead of deciding once in three or six years which member of the ruling class
was to misrepresent the people in parliament, universal suffrage was to serve
the people constituted in communes…The Communal constitution would have
restored to the social body all the forces hitherto absorbed by the state parasite
feeding upon, and clogging up, the free movement of society…
Its real secret was this. It was essentially a working class government, the
product of the struggle of the producing against the appropriating class, the
political form at last discovered under which to work out the political
emancipation of labour.138
Marx noted that, as the representative of the city’s working people, the
Commune set about implementing measures in their interests—banning night
work in bakeries and the employers’ imposition of fines on employees, handing
over to associations of workers any workshops or factories shut down by their
owners, providing pensions for widows and free education for every child,
and stopping the collection of debts incurred during the siege and eviction for
non-payment of rent. The Commune also showed its internationalism by tearing
down monuments to militarism and appointing a German worker as its minister
of labour.139
It had no chance to show what further measures might be carried out by a
workers’ government. For the republican government immediately began
organising armed forces to suppress it, and worked with its Prussian ‘enemy’
to do so. It persuaded Bismarck to release French prisoners of war captured
the autumn before and untouched by the ferment of ideas in Paris. It gathered
them in Versailles, together with new recruits from the countryside, under
officers with barely disguised royalist sympathies. By the end of April Thiers
had Paris surrounded by an army dedicated to crushing the Commune, and an
agreement from Bismarck to allow it to pass through Prussian lines. The
Commune faced overwhelming odds. It also faced another problem. Its elected
representatives were heroically dedicated to their cause. But they lacked a
political understanding of how to respond to the forces gathering against them.
Two major political currents had developed within the workers’ movement
in France since the 1830s. First, there was the current associated with August
Blanqui. It conceived of the workers’ struggle as a more radical, more socially
conscious version of the Jacobinism of 1793. It stressed the role of a highly
organised conspiratorial minority acting on behalf of the working class. So
Blanqui’s life had been marked by a succession of heroic attempts at
insurrection when the mass of workers were not ready for it, followed by long
spells in prison while workers took action without him (including
imprisonment by the republican government throughout the Commune). The
second current grew out of the social teachings of Proudhon. There was a bitter
reaction against the experience of Jacobinism by his followers and a rejection
of political action. They argued that workers could solve their problems
through ‘mutualism’—associations which could set up cooperative businesses
—without worrying about the state.
Marx saw both approaches as dangerously inadequate. He had no doubt
that workers should learn from the experience of the Great French Revolution,
but he believed they had to go far beyond it. There had to be decisive political
action, as the Blanquists argued, but it had to be based on organised mass
activity, not on heroic actions by small groups. There had to be economic
reorganisation of production as the Proudhonists argued, but it could not occur
without political revolution. However, Marx was not in a position to influence
events in Paris. There were people in the Commune such as the Blanquist
Vaillant who were prepared to collaborate with Marx, but there were none
who fully accepted his ideas. Both the Central Committee of the National
Guard and the Commune were composed not of Marxists, but of Blanquists and
Proudhonists—and their decision-making suffered from the deficiencies of
both traditions.
The republican government had virtually no forces at its disposal at the
time of its flight from Paris on 18 March. It would have been possible for the
National Guard to march on Versailles at that point and disperse its forces
almost without firing a shot. But the ‘non-political’ Proudhonist tradition led
the Commune to spend its time passing fine resolutions while leaving Thiers
free to gather troops. When Thiers showed his aggressive intent by beginning
to shell Paris on 2 April, they did call for a march on Versailles. But they made
no serious preparations for it, sending the National Guard off without proper
organisation and lacking the cannon to reply to artillery attacks from the other
side. They handed the still weak forces in Versailles an unnecessary victory,
and ended all chance of dispersing them easily.
They made a parallel mistake inside Paris itself. The whole of the
country’s gold was in the vaults of the Bank of France. The Commune could
have seized it, denying funds to Thiers and asserting its own mastery over the
country’s economy. But neither the Blanquist nor the Proudhonist tradition
allowed for such an assault on the ‘rights of property’. As a result, things were
much easier for Thiers than they need have been.
The revenge of the bourgeosie
Thiers took the opportunity to build up an enormous army. It began to bombard
the city systematically from forts on the outskirts, defeating the Communard
forces in a series of skirmishes, and then broke through into the city itself on 21
May. If Thiers expected an easy conquest, he was to be disappointed. The
workers of Paris fought street by street, block by block, building by building. It
took Thiers’ troops a week to drive them back from the affluent western part of
the city through the centre to the Commune’s stronghold in the east, crushing the
last resistance early in the morning on Whit Sunday.
The defeat of the Commune was followed by an orgy of violence almost
without precedent in modern times. The bourgeois paper Le Figaro boasted,
‘Never has such an opportunity presented itself for curing Paris of the moral
gangrene that has been consuming it for the past 25 years’.140 The victorious
commanders of the Versailles troops seized the opportunity.
Anyone who had fought for the Commune was shot on the spot—1,900
people between Whit Sunday morning and Whit Monday morning alone (more
in one day than in Paris during the whole of the ‘Great Terror’ of 1793-94).
Troops patrolled the streets picking up poorer people at will and condemning
many to death after 30 second trials because they looked like Communards. A
preacher told of witnessing the execution of 25 women accused of pouring
boiling water over advancing troops. The London Times commented on:
…the inhuman laws of revenge under which the Versailles troops have been
shooting, bayoneting, ripping up prisoners, women and children…So far as we
can recollect there has been nothing like it in history…The wholesale
executions inflicted by the Versailles soldiery sicken the soul.141
The total number of killings came to somewhere between 20,000 and
30,000 according to calculations by present day French historians.142 Another
40,000 Communards were held in prison hulks for a year before being put on
trial—5,000 of these were sentenced to deportation and another 5,000 to lesser
penalties.
One of the deportees was the best-known leader of the fighting women,
Louise Michel. She told the court, ‘I will not defend myself; I will not be
defended. I belong entirely to the social revolution. If you let me live, I shall
not cease to cry vengeance’.143 The Commune had been held back from
granting women the vote by the prejudices of its time. But working class
women understood, despite this, that the crushing of the Commune was a
crushing of themselves.
The repression had a terrible impact on the working class of Paris. As
Alistair Horne comments, ‘The face of Paris changed in one curious way for
some years: half the house painters, half the plumbers, the tile layers, the
shoemakers and zinc workers had disappeared’.144 It was to be almost two
decades before a new generation of French workers rose, who remembered the
suppression of the Commune by the ‘republican’ government, but who had the
determination to resume the struggle for a better world.
Yet Karl Marx had the last word on the Commune. He saw that it
represented the greatest challenge the new world of capital had yet faced—and
the greatest inspiration to the new class created by capital but in opposition to
it. He wrote to his friend Kugelmann that the Communards had been ‘storming
heaven’,145 and had provided ‘a new point of departure of worldwide
significance’.146
Part seven
The century of hope and horror
Chronology
1880s: Britain occupies Egypt. Carve up of Africa. Commercial development
of telephone, phonograph, electric generation and light.
1890-1900: Japan attacks China and takes Taiwan, Spanish-American war.
Invention of motor car and movies.
1899-1902: Boer War—British set up first concentration camps.
1900: Mendel’s genetic theory gains publicity, 16 years after his death.
1903: First airplane.
1904: Russia loses war with Japan.
1905: Revolution in Russia. Industrial Workers of World founded. Einstein’s
Special Theory of Relativity.
1910-14: ‘Great Unrest’ in Britain, Orangemen arm in Ireland.
1911: Proclamation of Chinese Republic. Mexican Revolution.
1912-14: Strikes and barricades in Russia, Dublin Lockout, ‘Bread and Roses’
strike.
1912-13: Balkan Wars.
1913: Ford mass production car plant.
1914: Outbreak of First World War, collapse of ‘Second International.
1916: ‘Easter Rising’ in Dublin.
1917: Russian Revolutions in February and October, mutinies in French army
and German navy, US enters war.
1918: Revolution in German and Austro-Hungarian empires.
1919: Foundation of Communist International, murder of Rosa Luxemburg,
civil war in Germany, Bavarian and Hungarian Soviet Republics, guerrilla war
in Ireland, Amritsar killings in India, 4 May movement in China, Versailles
Treaty.
1920: German workers defeat Kapp Putsch. Factory occupations in Italy.
1921: Britain partitions Ireland. Kronstadt revolt in Russia.
1922: Italian Fascists given power.
1923: French occupation of Ruhr, great inflation, Communists call off rising,
Nazi putsch.
1925: Heisenberg’s quantum theory.
1926: Defeat of General Strike in Britain.
1927: Massacre of workers in Shanghai. Leon Trotsky exiled.
1928-29: Stalin takes all power, First Five Year Plan, ‘collectivisation’ of
agriculture, mass arrests.
1929: Wall Street Crash.
1931: Revolution in Spain.
1933: Hitler takes power in Germany, famine in Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
1934: Vienna anti-fascist rising, anti-fascist protests in France, Asturias rising
in Spain, strikes in US.
1936: Popular Front electoral victories in France and Spain, occupation of
factories in France, military coup and revolutionary risings in Spain, formation
of CIO in US, General Motors sit-in. Moscow trials.
1938: Hitler takes over Austria, Munich agreement.
1939: Victory for Spanish fascists, German invasion of Poland, Second World
War begins.
1940: Fall of France, Italy enters war.
1941: Hitler attacks Russia. Japan attacks US fleet.
1942: Nazis draw up plans for Holocaust, German army defeated at
Stalingrad. Famine in Bengal, ‘Quit India’ movement.
1943: Strikes in Turin, Allies land in southern Italy.
1944: Allied landings in Normandy, uprising liberates Paris, Warsaw Rising,
Greek resistance attacked by British.
1945: Resistance liberates north Italian cities, US and Britain take western
Germany, Russia the east. Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Britain reestablishes
French rule in Vietnam. Communist-led governments in Eastern Europe.
1947: Britain leaves India. Partition leads to bloodshed. UN backs Israeli state
in Palestine. First computer.
1947-49: Beginning of Cold War. Marshall Plan, Prague coup, Berlin airlift,
Yugoslav split with Russia, McCarthyism in US. Chinese People’s Liberation
Army enters Beijing.
1950: Korean War. Indonesian independence from Dutch.
1952-57: Mau Mau rebellion against Britain in Kenya.
1953: Overthrow of Egyptian monarchy by Nasser. Death of Stalin. US
explodes H-bomb.
1954: Geneva agreement ends war in Korea and divides Vietnam. CIA
overthrows Guatemalan government. Revolt against French rule in Algeria.
1955-56: Montgomery bus boycott starts civil rights movement in US.
1956: Egypt nationalises Suez Canal, attacked by Britain, France and Israel.
Khrushchev denounces Stalin. Hungarian Revolution.
1957: Ghana wins independence.
1958: Nationalist revolution in Iraq. ‘Great Leap Forward’ in China. De
Gaulle takes power in France.
1959: Castro’s rebels take Havana.
1960: Nigerian independence.
1961: Abortive CIA invasion of Cuba. First split between Russia and China.
US ‘advisers’ in Vietnam.
1962: Cuban Missile Crisis.
1964: Independence for Algeria. US landing in Dominican Republic.
1965: Military coup in Indonesia, half a million people killed.
1967: Israel occupies West Bank after ‘Six Day War’. Black uprising in
Detroit. Founding of Black Panthers. Far right colonels’ coup in Greece.
1968: Tet Offensive in Vietnam, student revolts all over Europe. May events in
France. ‘Prague Spring’.
1969: ‘Hot autumn’ in Italy. Cordoba rising in Argentina. ‘Troubles’ in
Northern Ireland.
1970: Strikes bring down Gomulka in Poland. Election of Allende in Chile.
US invasion of Cambodia, students shot dead at Kent State University.
1973: Coup in Chile, war in Middle East, polytechnic rising in Greece.
1974: Outbreak of world recession, second miners’ strike and fall of Heath
government in Britain. Revolution in Portugal, fall of Greek colonels.
1975: ‘Historic compromise’ in Italy. Independence for Portuguese colonies.
Defeat of revolutionary left in Portugal. Guerrilla struggle in Rhodesia.
1976: Opposition legalised in Spain. School student uprising in South Africa.
CIA sponsors civil war in Angola.
1976-77: Turmoil in China after death of Mao, first market reforms.
1979: Iranian Revolution, ‘Islamic Republic’. Sandinistas take power in
Nicaragua. Thatcher government in Britain. Russia invades Afghanistan.
1980: Occupation of Polish shipyards, Solidarnosc workers’ movement.
Military coup in Turkey. Iraqi war against Iran with US backing. End of white
rule in Zimbabwe. First personal computers using silicon chip.
1981: Cruise missiles in Europe. ‘Second Cold War’. Civil war in El
Salvador, US Contra terrorism against Nicaragua. Polish military crush
Solidarnosc.
1982: Falklands War.
1983: US invasion of Grenada.
1984-85: British miners’ strike.
1987: Glasnost permits first free debate for 60 years in USSR.
1988: Demonstrations in non-Russian republics of USSR. Miners’ strikes in
Poland. Strike waves in Yugoslavia and South Korea. Near uprising in
Algeria.
1989: Non-Communist government in Poland, Tiananmen Square protests in
China, miners’ strike in Russia, political revolutions across Eastern Europe.
Rise of Milosovic in Serbia. US invasion of Panama. Scientists begin to warn
about danger of ‘greenhouse effect’.
1991: US-led war against Iraq. Failed coup in Russia, disbandment of USSR.
Civil war in Yugoslavia and Algeria.
1992: Famine and civil war in Somalia. Civil war in Tajikistan. Slump in
Russian economy.
1994: Black rule in South Africa.
1995: Strikes rock French government.
1998 Economic crisis across east Asia, collapse of Suharto in Indonesia.
1999: US-led war against Serbia.
Chapter 1
The world of capital
Capital had stamped its imprint everywhere in the world by 1900. There was
scarcely a group of people anywhere whose lives were not being transformed
by it—only the ice deserts of Antarctica, the most remote forests of the
Amazon and the valleys of highland New Guinea still awaited those apostles
of capitalism, the European explorers with their cheap goods, Bibles, germs
and hopes of unearned riches.
The impact of capital was not the same everywhere. In many parts of the
world it still meant the age-old application of muscle and sweat, now directed
towards profit-making for far away capitalists rather than local consumption.
But in Western Europe and North America mechanisation spread to ever-wider
areas of industry, transport and even agriculture.
The industrial revolution a century before in Britain had been concentrated
in one branch of textile production—cotton-spinning. Now every conceivable
form of a manufacturing was revolutionised and then revolutionised again—
soap-making, printing, dyeing, shipbuilding, printing, boot and shoe-making,
and paper-making. The discovery of how to generate electricity and the
development of the filament bulb created a new way of producing artificial
light and prolonging working hours (Bombay’s first textile strike was a
reaction to this). The invention of the electric motor opened up the possibility
of driving machinery at some distance from an immediate energy source such
as a steam engine. The typewriter revolutionised procedures for business
correspondence, and broke the monopoly of male clerks with long years of
office experience. The invention of the telegraph and, at the end of the 1880s,
the telephone enabled both production and warfare to be coordinated more
easily over long distances—as well as allowing people to keep in touch more
easily (Engels had a telephone in his London home shortly before his death in
1895). The rise of the factory was matched by the relentless spread of the
railways, bringing remote regions into close contact with cities. Coal mines
proliferated to feed the ever-growing demand for fuel of the railways, factories
and steam ships. Iron and steel works the size of small towns sprang up, with
towns beside them for their workers.
The growth of one industry encouraged the growth of another. The people
of the cities, mining villages and steel towns had to be fed and clothed. The
first agri-industry developed as grain from the previously ‘unopened’ prairies
of the American Midwest, beef from the Argentinian pampas and wool from
Australia were shipped thousands of miles. This in turn encouraged the
development of new ways of storing and preserving food. Growing cities
required some means of getting people from where they lived to where they
worked. Capitalists who believed they could make money by running horse-
drawn ‘omnibuses’, building tram systems or even digging underground
railways did so—and where they would not undertake such tasks, local
municipalities often would. The middle classes of the mid-19th century had
been willing to tolerate the poor living in overcrowded squalor and dying of
disease or hunger. But by the late 19th century they understood how diseases
could spread from poor to rich neighbourhoods, and pushed for the building of
sewage systems, the clearing of overcrowded city centres, the supply of clean
water, and the provision of gas to light streets and heat homes. Groups of
capitalists set out to profit from such services and employed new groups of
workers to supply them.
The process of urbanisation accelerated. In the 1880s more than a third of
London’s population were newcomers to the city.1 By 1900 three quarters of
Britain’s population lived in towns or cities and only about one in ten worked
on the land.2 Britain was the extreme example. In Germany a third of the
population still worked on the land, and many industrial workers lived in small
towns or industrial villages rather than cities at the beginning of the century. In
France 30 percent of people still worked the land as late as 1950, and in Japan
the figure was 38 percent.3 Even in the US there remained a large farming
population (although mechanisation was beginning to transform the prairies),
and until the 1940s more people lived in small towns than big conurbations.
Nevertheless, in all these countries the trend was to follow the British
example. The village—with its church, preacher, squire and, perhaps,
schoolteacher—was becoming a thing of the past. The whole way in which
people lived was being transformed.
This provided both opportunities and problems for capital. The
opportunities lay in the provision of non-material goods. People had needs
other than material ones. They needed to relax, socialise and recover from both
the physical exhaustion and the numbing monotony of work. Factory production
and city life had stamped out most of the old ways of satisfying such needs,
based as they were on village life, with its seasonal rhythms and opportunities
for informal get-togethers. Capital could profit by providing new ways of
socialising. The brewers had their profitable networks of pubs. The first
newspaper barons discovered an enormous audience for titillation and
amusement (the British newspaper millionaire Harmsworth had his first
success with a weekly called Titbits). The entertainment business took its first
tentative step forward with the music halls, and another with the invention in
the 1890s of the phonograph (forerunner of the record player) and of ‘moving
pictures’.
Organised sport also sprang from the new world of capitalist industry.
Informal games with balls were many thousands of years old. But the
organisation of teams playing according to rules which reflected the
competitive ethos of capitalist industry was one of the new features of 19th
century Britain which soon spread across the world. Factory towns, and even
factories, were the birthplace of many teams (hence names such as ‘Arsenal’
and ‘Moscow Dynamo’), with local businessmen presiding over them—seeing
advantages in a focus of local identification which cut across class lines.
Capitalism had begun by taking people who were a product of a previous
form of society and utilising part of their lives—the part that involved slaving
away for 12, 14 or 16 hours a day in a workshop or factory. But now it could
profit from enveloping their whole lives—from the beds people slept in and
the roofs which kept them dry, to the food they ate, the effort it took them to
reach their workplaces and the diversions which allowed them to forget the
world of labour. It became a total system.
This created a problem, however. Capitalism could no longer look for a
supply of fresh labour power outside the system. It had to take steps to ensure
the supply existed, and that meant addressing the raising of new generations of
people. Capitalists had shown few such concerns in the early days of the
industrial revolution in Britain, and the industrial capitalists of other countries
were usually just as indifferent. Women and children provided the cheapest
and most adaptable labour for the spinning mills, and they were crammed in
with no thought for the effect on their health or on the care of younger children.
If capital accumulation necessitated the destruction of the working class family,
then so be it!
By the 1850s, however, the more far-sighted capitalists began to fear that
future reserves of labour power were being exhausted. In Britain in 1871, the
Poor Law inspectors reported, ‘It is well established that no town-bred boys
of the poorer classes, especially those reared in London, ever attains…four
feet ten and a half inches’ in height or a chest of 29 inches ‘at the age of 15. A
stunted growth is characteristic of the race’.4 The Mansion House Committee
of 1893 drew the conclusion that ‘the obvious remedy…is to improve the
stamina, physical and moral, of the London working class’.5
A succession of laws restricted the hours which children could work, and
banned the employment of women in industries that might damage their chances
of successful pregnancy. A few capitalists built ‘model villages’—like the
soap-manufacturer Lever’s Port Sunlight on the Mersey and the chocolate-
maker Cadbury’s Bourneville near Birmingham—where they could ensure
their workforces were housed in conditions which would encourage long term
productivity (aided by a strict ban on alcohol). But government efforts to deal
with the ‘physical stamina’ of workers had to wait until the end of the first
decade of the 20th century. An inquiry by a ‘Physical Deterioration Committee’
into the low physical calibre of recruits for the Boer War of 1899-1902
expressed concern at Britain’s future ability to wage war, and a Liberal
government reacted by introducing free school meals—the first limited move
towards what later became the welfare state. Aside from this, most of the
stress was on improving the ‘moral stamina’ of the working class—on a moral
offensive against ‘improvidence’, ‘dissoluteness’, ‘drunkenness’, and the
‘demoralisation produced by…indiscriminate charity’.6
Dealing with these alleged defects involved campaigns by philanthropists,
churches and parliamentarians which extolled the middle class ideal of the
family—a stable, monogamous nuclear family of working husband, loyal
housewife and disciplined children. Only such a family, it was claimed, could
lead to children growing up dutiful and obedient. The woman’s place was in
the home, in accordance with ‘human nature’. Practices which might challenge
the model family, however widespread in the past, were branded as ‘immoral’
or ‘unnatural’. So pre-marital and extra-marital sex, divorce, contraception,
and discussion of sexual hygiene and sexual enjoyment were all castigated in a
new climate of official puritanism. Male homosexuality became a criminal
offence for the first time in Britain.
Associated with this model of the family was the notion of the ‘family
wage’—of male earnings being sufficient for a wife to stay at home and bring
up the children. This never became a reality for anybody except a tiny minority
of workers. Employers who would grant men wage increases during periods of
boom, when strikes and labour shortages could damage them, would just as
readily take these back in times of recession. Many of the women who gave up
jobs to become housewives after getting married and having children remained
involved in various forms of work for wages (homeworking or cleaning). But
setting an ideal and making it seem that a woman’s work was not as important
as that of a male ‘breadwinner’ made it easier for employers to get away with
paying low wages.
Along with concern for the ‘morals’ of workers went a growing obsession
with efficiency. The capitalists of the early industrial revolution had seen the
road to profit in making people work for as long as possible each day—
extracting from them what Karl Marx called ‘absolute surplus value’. With the
possibility of running production virtually non-stop with two and three-shift
systems, concern began to switch to intensifying labour and obliterating any
pauses in it. An American, Frederick Taylor, introduced ‘scientific
management’—the use of inspectors with stopwatches to break down what a
worker did into its component actions in order to work out the maximum
number of actions a worker could perform in a working day, and then to make
the wage dependent on fulfilling this norm. The machine was no longer an
adjunct of the worker, but the worker an adjunct of the machine.
Finally, concern with productivity also implied the need for education and
literacy. Reading, writing and arithmetic had been optional for the peasants and
farm labourers of pre-industrial societies. That is why any discussion of
literature in pre-capitalist or early capitalist times involves the literature of the
upper and middle classes. But the complex interacting processes of capitalist
production now required a literate workforce—if only to read instructions on
machinery and labels on packing cases—with a basic level of numeracy and,
as important as these two things, ingrained habits of time discipline and
obedience. Even British capitalism, which had managed its industrial
revolution without this, felt compelled to introduce compulsory schooling up to
the age of ten for its future workers in the 1870s—although it left the education
of its middle and upper classes to private ‘grammar’ and (misnamed) ‘public’
schools. Late-arriving capitalisms, requiring workforces competent enough to
challenge Britain’s hold on markets, usually pushed stringent public
educational programmes from the beginning, aimed not only at training future
workers but at technically equipping parts of the middle class.
The infant capitalism of the late feudal and absolutist periods had grown to
adolescence at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th centuries. By the
early 20th century it was entering maturity in Western Europe and North
America. As such, it showed many of the features of the society we live in
today. One consequence was that people began to take these features for
granted. In the early industrial revolution, people had been shocked by the
transition from rural life to industrial labour. They had often looked to the past
for some remedy for their ills—as when the Chartists set about a scheme of
establishing small farms. The sense of shock had gone by the beginning of the
20th century. People could still be amazed by individual innovations, like the
motor car or electric light. But they were not shocked any more by a society
built on competition, timekeeping and greed. Capitalist society was all that
people knew. Its characteristic forms of behaviour seemed to be ‘human
nature’. People no longer realised how bizarre their behaviour would have
seemed to their forebears.
The ideology of progress
Apologists for the new world of industrial capitalism believed they were on
the verge of solving all humanity’s problems. The same optimism infected
much of intellectual life. Each year saw new miracles of human inventiveness.
Life was more comfortable than ever before for the bourgeoisie and the middle
classes, and even some sections of workers saw their conditions improve. It
seemed that things only had to continue as they were for the dreams of past
generations to be fulfilled.
Such beliefs were reinforced by developments in science and technology.
The physicist Thomson (Lord Kelvin) used Newton’s mechanics to provide a
mechanical model of the whole universe, from the smallest atom to the largest
galaxy, and James Clerk Maxwell tried to integrate into this the experimental
findings of Michael Faraday about electricity and magnetism.7 Simultaneously,
the naturalists Darwin and Wallace had provided an account of how species
evolved through a natural process of selection, and Darwin had gone on to
show that humanity itself was descended from an ape-like mammal. Chemists
had succeeded in making some of the organic substances found in living things
out of inorganic materials.
The old forces of religion and superstition tried to resist these advances in
knowledge, but the connection between science and industrial profit-making
meant they could only engage in a rearguard action. The Anglican bishop of
Oxford could denounce Darwin’s disciple Huxley, just as the papacy had once
denounced Galileo. But the clergy had lost their ability to control people’s
minds. It was as if the Enlightenment had finally emerged victorious in its
battle with the forces of unreason.
The new belief in the unimpeded advance of progress came to be called
‘positivism’ (the name given to these ideas by the French thinker Comte) or
‘scientism’. It provided the rationale for Émile Zola’s novels, trying to depict
human behaviour as the blind interplay of material conditions and hereditary
passion, and for Theodore Dreiser’s attempt in his novels about big business to
show capitalist behaviour as a version of ‘the survival of the fittest’. It
underlay the optimism in the early science fiction of H G Wells, with his image
of triumphant humanity landing on the moon, or of plays by George Bernard
Shaw like Man and Superman and Major Barbara. It was present in the
attempts by Sigmund Freud to explain irrational feelings and behaviour in
terms of forces within the human mind—the ego, the superego and the id—
interacting much like the parts of Kelvin’s universe.8 It was the backdrop to the
philosophy of Bertrand Russell and the guiding principle behind those, like
Sidney and Beatrice Webb and their Fabian Society in Britain, who believed
society could be changed for the better through piecemeal reform implemented
by benevolent civil servants.
Even reactionary forces which had previously depended on religious
obscurantism claimed to follow a scientific approach. Darwin’s scientific
insights into nature were twisted into the theories of ‘social Darwinism’,
which claimed that classes, nations or races which ruled over others did so
because their ‘innate superiority’ had won out in the battle for survival. Old
prejudices about ‘better blood’ or ‘superior breeding’ were translated into a
modern, apparently scientific, terminology. In the same way, the old argument
of St Augustine (and Luther and Calvin) about the necessity for a strong state
power to stop the evil which flowed from ‘the curse of Adam’—‘original
sin’—was now rephrased in terms of the necessity of controlling people’s
‘animal instincts’. Whereas the church had demanded the right to police
people’s behaviour, proponents of ‘eugenics’ now demanded that the state used
supposedly scientific measurements of ‘innate’ intelligence and ‘criminality’ to
restrict some people’s ability to breed. This was combined with forbodings
about the fate of the ‘race’, as the poor tended to have larger families than the
rich—a concern which could be shared by middle class reformers like the
young John Maynard Keynes as much as by upper class reactionaries.
Yet, by and large, ‘scientism’ and ‘positivism’ were associated with the
belief that the future could only be better than the present, that modernity itself
meant human improvement. By 1914, faith in the future was well on its way to
replacing faith in God—although there were still many upholders of
respectable opinion who tried to combine the two.
The rise of capitalist democracy
The word democracy was anathema to the ruling classes of the mid-19th
century. They still denounced it as the ‘mob rule’ of Burke’s ‘swinish
multitude’. Macaulay, the English Whig historian, could be as adamant as any
Tory. ‘Universal suffrage’, he said, ‘would be fatal for all purposes for which
government exists’, and ‘utterly incompatible with the existence of
civilisation’.9 Even when the ruling classes were forced by pressure from
below to concede the right to vote, they sought to impose property
qualifications which excluded the lower classes. Britain’s Reform Bill of 1832
extended the suffrage from 200,000 to a million men—that is, to not more than
one fifth of adult males. An act of 1867, carried through in the midst of great
popular agitation,10 increased the numbers voting but still left half the male
population without the vote, and ‘neither the Liberal nor the Conservative
leaders expected the act to establish a democratic constitution’.11 In Prussia
and a number of other German states a three class voting system gave the
majority of parliamentary seats to the minority with the greatest wealth. On top
of this, almost all ruling classes insisted on an unelected second chamber—a
House of Lords or a senate of notables—with a veto over decision-making,
and a monarch with the power to appoint the leader of the government. No
wonder Marx expressed the view at the time of the Paris Commune that the
dictatorship of Louis Bonaparte was more in tune with the desires of capitalist
ruling classes than a democratic republic: ‘It is the state form of modern class
rule, at least on the European continent’.12
Yet as the century progressed certain ruling class figures saw that
democracy did not have to be a menace to them, providing they were able to
set down the rules within which it operated. Louis Bonaparte himself had
discovered how to manipulate a vote based on universal (male) suffrage when
it came to confirming his own seizure of power in 1851. The majority of the
French electorate were peasants, dependent on village priests and
schoolmasters for their knowledge of political events. If Bonaparte controlled
the flow of information sufficiently to scare them with stories about what was
happening in the cities, he could win their votes and prove he was ‘more
democratic’ than the republicans. It was an example Bismarck was happy to
follow when he made the king of Prussia into emperor of Germany—universal
male suffrage elected to an imperial parliament with very limited powers,
while a property-based system still operated in state elections.
Britain’s ruling class discovered that piecemeal extensions of the franchise
did not undermine their power to determine the policies of the state, since most
state power lay outside immediate parliamentary control. It resided in the
unelected hierarchies of the military, the police, the judiciary and the civil
service. These laid down the parameters within which parliament normally
operated and could reject any measure they particularly disliked as
‘unconstitutional’ (as they did when the House of Commons voted for ‘Home
Rule’ in Ireland in 1912). Under such conditions, rather than acting as a
mechanism by which mass pressure was applied against the ruling class,
parliament turned into a mechanism for taming the representatives of mass
feeling—forcing them to curtail their demands to fit within the narrow space
allowed by the ruling class. Gladstone, the leader of Britain’s main capitalist
party—the Liberals—already sensed in 1867 ‘the desirability of encouraging a
larger share of the population to feel the centre of its political attention should
be parliament’.13
As Ralph Miliband has written:
The politicians’ appropriation of ‘democracy’ did not signify their conversion
to it: it was rather an attempt to exorcise its effects…A carefully limited and
suitably controlled measure of democracy was acceptable, and even from
some aspect desirable. But anything that went beyond that was not. The whole
political system was geared to such sentiments.14
Everywhere extensions of the franchise were accompanied by a conscious
effort by ruling class politicians to influence the hearts and minds of the lower
classes. In Britain the first attempt of the Conservative Party to create a
‘National Union’ with a membership outside parliament came in the year of the
1867 Reform Act. Its aim was ‘primarily to bring together Conservative
working men’,15 through a network of local associations and drinking clubs:
‘The directness and urgency of the Conservative appeal to the working classes
is the most striking feature of the early work of the National Union’.16 It was an
appeal based on the deference of sections of workers to their supposed betters,
on the religious or ethnic antagonisms of some workers towards others (so in
certain towns in northern England and Scotland to be a Conservative was to be
an Orange Protestant opponent of Irish immigrants), on a glorification of
Britain’s imperialist expansion, and on charitable handouts to the poor at
election time.17 The Conservatives’ efforts to appeal to the lower middle and
working classes were matched by the Liberals, who set up their own national
network of local associations. Only after 1905 did a few ‘independent’ Labour
candidates enjoy success against the two capitalist parties which had
hegemonised politics among the working class for 40 years—and they were as
committed to the existing set-up as their established rivals.
The pattern elsewhere was essentially the same. In the US the working
class was divided between Republicans and Democrats, essentially along the
lines of native-born Americans versus immigrants (with the added
complication of the Democrats’ pro-South sympathies). In France conservative
Catholics encouraged anti-Semitic sentiment as they battled for influence with
middle class anti-clerical republicans. In Germany the Junker landowners of
the east found it relatively easy to ensure rural workers voted as they wanted;
the ‘National Liberal’ pro-Bismarck industrialists ran a party of their own; and
in the south the Catholic church was able to dominate people’s political
thinking even in many mining areas.
The efforts of the upper class parties were aided by the growth of the mass
press. In the 1820s and 1830s the British ruling class had attempted to prevent
the spread of seditious ideas among the new working class by taxes designed
to price newspapers beyond their pockets. From the 1850s onwards a new
breed of capitalist entrepreneur saw the possibility of making money out of
popular papers. By the beginning of the 20th century people like Alfred
Harmsworth (soon to be Lord Northcliffe) and Max Aitken (later Lord
Beaverbrook) saw newspapers as political weapons. Such men were able to
turn a minor episode in the Boer War, the Siege of Mafeking, into a focus of
attention for people of all classes. In a similar way, the French press was able
to whip up anti-Semitic hysteria in the case of Captain Dreyfus, wrongly
imprisoned as a German spy, and the German press used a war scare to beat
back the socialists in the 1907 election.
The cultivation of a new sort of nationalism was part of the process of
controlling capitalist democracy. The nationalism of the mid-19th century had
been found mainly among those peoples divided or oppressed by the state
system imposed on Europe with the restoration of the old order in 1814-15. It
was a rallying cry for those fighting for liberation, and it was associated with
the demands for democracy and republicanism. Such nationalism from below
was still widespread at the end of the century among groups oppressed by the
Russian, Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires. The spread of the market
encouraged it. Middle classes, speaking local languages, emerged from the
peasantry, and they began to struggle to create national states, or at least
autonomous national structures within existing states, in order to further their
interests.
A different sort of nationalism arose alongside and in opposition to this old
variant, propagated from above both by old monarchies and by newer
capitalist rulers. So Bismarck embraced a form of German nationalism; the
Russian tsars tried to ‘Russify’ their Finnish, Ukrainian, Polish, and Turkic
speaking subjects; the French upper classes attempted to direct people’s
energies towards ‘revenge’ against Germany and enthusiasm for the conquest
of North Africa and Indochina; and Britain’s rulers proclaimed their mission to
‘rule the waves’ and ‘civilise the natives’.18 Governments, newspapers,
industrialists and financiers threw their weight behind the propagation of such
nationalism, proclaiming the common identity of the ruling and exploited
classes of each country—insisting they were ‘kith and kin’ even while one
lived in luxury and the other sweated or even starved. The career opportunities
for sections of the middle class in administering empires cemented them
materially to the new nationalism, encouraging them to help spread its
influence among layers of workers—for instance, by running new mass semi-
militaristic organisations such as the Scouts for the youth of both the middle
and working classes. These organisations were allegedly ‘non-political’, but
their commitment to the ruling class ideology of monarch, ‘country’ and
‘empire’ was never in doubt.
The overall effect of such measures was to turn suffrage, which ruling
classes in the 1840s had seen as a deadly threat, into a means of domesticating
a layer of workers’ representatives by the 1900s. The change did not occur
overnight, or without friction. There was often upper class resistance. In
Britain it took 95 years for the ruling class to move from accepting in 1832 that
the middle classes should have the vote, to conceding universal adult suffrage.
In Belgium it required two general strikes to force an extension of the
franchise. In Germany there were bitter clashes in the streets over the issue in
the 1900s, and it was only in 1918 that revolutionary upheaval caused the
ruling class to concede the vote to everyone.
Resistance to granting workers the vote was matched by resistance to
granting it to women. The spread of market relations meant that more middle
class as well as working class women entered the paid labour force. But the
moralists’ model family, with its concern for the ‘proper’ upbringing of the next
generation, saw a woman’s role as confined to the home, and justified this with
corresponding notions of female competence and female ‘values’. Such notions
would have made no sense to the medieval peasant woman engaged in heavy
labour, and they hardly fitted the Lancashire mill worker. But to the middle
class men of the first decade of the 20th century—and the working class men
influenced by the newspapers—they made the demand for votes for women an
absurdity.
Paradoxically, even the denial of the vote had the effect of binding people
to the system of capitalist democracy. Most of the agitation was fighting to be
part of the system, not to go beyond it. Before 1914 the campaign for the vote
led upper and middle class women to take direct action against property and
the state. But when the war came, the best-known leaders of the women’s
suffrage movement in Britain—Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst—threw
themselves into the campaign to recruit men for the slaughter on the Western
Front. Sylvia Pankhurst, who opposed the carnage, came to see parliament
itself as a barrier to progress.
Social democracy
The rapid expansion of industry, and of the industrial working class, created a
new audience for the ideas of the socialist organisations which had been
battered by the defeats of 1848 and 1871. But nowhere did these organisations
feel strong enough to make a head-on revolutionary challenge to the state.
Instead they followed a strategy developed by German socialists. They took
advantage of the opening provided by the new electoral systems, however
limited and skewed in favour of the upper classes, and built legal workers’
organisations such as trade unions, welfare organisations, sports bodies and
even singing clubs.
The Social Democratic Party (SPD) of Germany was enormously
successful in some ways. Its vote grew from election to election and was
bigger than that of either the big landowners’ party or the industrialists’ party. It
survived a 12 year period of illegality under ‘anti-socialist’ laws, achieved a
membership of a million and ran 90 local daily papers. Its network of ancillary
organisations (unions, welfare societies and so on) became part of the fabric of
people’s lives in many industrial districts. It managed to do all this despite the
repeated arrest of its newspaper editors, organisers and parliamentary
deputies. It seemed to show that capitalist democracy could be turned against
capitalism—a lesson Frederick Engels hammered home in article after article.
The German example was soon being followed by other parties. It was the
model which Engels urged upon the French Workers’ Party of Jules Guesde and
Paul Lafargue. In Spain the Madrid worker Pablo Iglesias began building a
socialist party, the PSOE, along essentially the same lines. So did activists in
Italy. Even in Britain, where 20 years of rising living standards for skilled
workers had made them receptive to the message of the Liberal Party of
Gladstone, a group of radical democrats moved leftwards in 1883 and set out
to build a miniature version of the German party, the Social Democratic
Federation. When an international federation of workers’ organisations,
generally known as the Second International, was formed in 1889, the German
party was the guiding light within it.
But there was a contradiction between the theory of these parties, with
their commitment to the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism, and their day to
day practical activity, which consisted of carefully applying pressure for
reform within capitalism. This came to the fore in the mid-1890s.
One of the leading intellectuals in the German party was Eduard Bernstein.
He had been a friend of Engels, and had played an important role in keeping
the party going from exile during the period of illegality. In the mid-1890s he
declared that the basic theoretical assumptions of Marx and Engels had been
wrong. He argued that generalised economic crises were no longer an integral
part of capitalism, and said they had also been wrong to foresee an ever-
greater polarisation between classes:
In all advanced countries we see the privileges of the capitalist bourgeoisie
yielding step by step to democratic organisations…The common interest gains
in power to an increasing extent as opposed to private interest, and the
elementary sway of economic forces ceases.19
Bernstein argued that this process could come to fruition without the
‘dissolution of the modern state system’20 demanded by Marx in his writings
on the Paris Commune. All that was necessary was a further spread of
parliamentarianism, with socialists embracing a thoroughgoing ‘liberalism’21
and a policy of piecemeal reform within the existing system.
Karl Kautsky, the SPD’s main theorist, denounced Bernstein’s argument.
He insisted that capitalism could not be reformed out of existence—at some
point there had to be a ‘struggle for power’ and a ‘social revolution’. But his
practical conclusions were not very different from Bernstein’s. He argued that
the socialist revolution would come about through the inevitable growth of the
socialist vote. Eventually the party would have an electoral majority and the
legitimacy to put down any attempted overthrow of a socialist government by
the forces of capitalism. Until then it had to avoid action which might provoke
reprisals. Unlike Bernstein, Kautsky said that there remained a distant goal of
social transformation. But his prescriptions for day to day socialist activity
were hardly any different.
Both shared the optimistic ‘scientism’ or ‘positivism’ of the middle class
intelligentsia and believed in the mechanical inevitability of progress. For
Bernstein, science, technology and increasing democracy were turning
capitalism into socialism. Kautsky saw the process as taking place in the
future, not the present, but was just as certain about its inevitability.
Throughout history, changes in the forces of production had led to changes in
the relations of production, and they would do so now, he said, if people only
waited. The 27 year old Polish-German revolutionary Rosa Luxemburg was
alone in challenging such complacency.
The SPD’s organisers, who spent all their energies on getting out the vote
and maintaining the ancillary organisations, threw their weight behind a formal
condemnation of Bernstein’s ideas, but continued to pursue a path of moderate
action within the system. So too did the trade union leaders, whose main
concern was trying to get employers to negotiate. Bernstein lost the vote within
the party, but won the argument.
Yet the ability of the socialist parties to expand their influence within
capitalism depended, in the end, on the stability of capitalism itself. Bernstein
recognised this when he made the supposedly crisis-free character of the
system a central part of his argument. German capitalism did go through a
phase in the 1890s when it seemed to have overcome any tendency to move
into crisis, and Bernstein generalised from this into the future.
By contrast, Rosa Luxemburg insisted that the very processes which
seemed to be stabilising capitalism in the 1890s would lead to even greater
instability later.22 She also grasped something which had already been half-
recognised by the English liberal economist Hobson and would be spelt out in
1916 by the Russian revolutionaries Nicolai Bukharin and Vladimir Lenin—
the phase of rapid capitalist growth was closely connected to the imperial
expansion of the Great Powers.
Imperialism
In 1876 no more than 10 percent of Africa was under European rule. By 1900
more than 90 percent was colonised. Britain, France and Belgium had divided
the continent between them, leaving small slices for Germany and Italy. In the
same period Britain, France, Russia and Germany established wide spheres of
influence extending from their colonial enclaves in China; Japan took over
Korea and Taiwan; France conquered all of Indochina; the US seized Puerto
Rico and the Philippines from Spain; and Britain and Russia agreed to an
informal partitioning of Iran. Even the smaller islands of the Pacific and Indian
oceans were subject to the dictates of London or Paris. The number of
genuinely independent states outside Europe and the Americas could be
counted on the fingers of one hand—the remains of the Ottoman Empire,
Thailand, Ethiopia and Afghanistan.
The mythology conveyed by children’s stories and the novels for their
parents was of intrepid white explorers subduing ignorant but subsequently
grateful ‘natives’—people who were ‘half-devil and half-child’, according to
Kipling in a poem urging the Americans to emulate the glories of British
colonialism. This mythology depicted the peoples of Africa and the islands of
the Indian and Pacific oceans as uniformly ‘primitive’, characterised by
cannibalism and witchcraft.
In fact, European ‘explorers’ such as Mungo Park in the 1790s and 1800s,
and Livingtone and Stanley in the 1850s and 1860s, were only able to make
their famous journeys through Africa because structured societies and
established states existed. These states had been easily able to deal with the
first European attempts at conquest. In 1880, it is worth remembering, western
Europeans had been in regular maritime contact with the African coast for 400
years—and Indians, Arabs and Turks had been in contact with whole swathes
of the African interior for considerably longer. Yet Europeans directly
controlled only a few isolated, mainly coastal, regions. As Bruce Vandervort
has written, ‘In the early modern period at least, Europe’s technological edge
was seldom very great, or important, except perhaps at sea. Indigenous
peoples were quick to catch up with European innovations’.23
The first European attempts to carve out colonies in Africa involved them
in bloody battles which they often lost. The French had to fight long and bitter
wars to conquer Algeria and Senegal. The British lost to an Ashanti army in
the early 1870s, to the Mahdi’s Sudanese army at Khartoum in 1884 (when the
same Charles George Gordon who had helped crush the T’ai p’ing rebellion in
China met a justly deserved death), and to the Zulus at Isandlwana in 1879.
The Italians suffered a devastating defeat at the hands of an Ethiopian army at
Adowa in 1896, when ‘a whole swaggering ethos of white conquest was
shattered’.24
But by the 1880s the accelerated industrialisation of Western Europe was
shifting the balance decisively towards the would-be colonisers. New
weapons—breech-loading rifles, steel-plated steamships capable of navigating
far up-river and, most notoriously, the Gatling machine gun—gave European
armies the decisive edge in most battles for the first time. What is more, the
endless flow of commodities spawned by industry made it relatively easy for
Europeans to bribe African allies to fight for them. Half the ‘Italian’ troops at
Adowa were Eritreans or Tigrayans, and many of the ‘British’ troops in Sudan
were Egyptian or Sudanese. The ‘divide and rule’ strategy which had worked
so well for Britain’s rulers in India now began to be applied on a large scale
in Africa.
The Europeans claimed to be fighting against ‘savagery’, but their methods
were barbaric. When the British army of Lord Kitchener finally conquered
Sudan at the Battle of Omdurman in 1898, his machine-gunners killed 10,000
Sudanese troops with the loss of only 48 men. ‘The many thousands of
Mahdists dying and wounded on the battlefield received no aid from the
British, who simply turned their backs and marched away’.25 ‘They called for
water and they called for our aid, but our officers spurned them,’ a British
soldier wrote in his diary. Kitchener had the skull of their leader, the Mahdi,
turned into an inkstand.26 Just as brutal was Lord Lugard’s expedition against
the rebellious village of Satiru in Nigeria. He estimated that his men killed
2,000 rebels without loss. Prisoners were executed and their heads put on
spikes.27 The Belgian king, Leopold, was in the forefront of pushing for a
Western crusade in Africa, claiming it would bring ‘civilisation’ and stamp out
slavery. He carved out the huge territory of Congo as a personal empire, and
used methods notorious even among other colonial powers. In an official
report to the British foreign office, Roger Casement told of a visit to a rubber-
producing region where ‘whole villages and districts I knew well and visited
as flourishing communities…are today without human beings.’ He learned that
Belgian soldiers who looted and burned villages then collected basketloads of
severed hands hacked from victims to prove they had not wasted ammunition.28
The capitalist powers certainly did not expend money and effort
conquering the rest of the world out of philanthropy. But they were not led to
do so simply by racism either, however much they saw this as justifying their
mission. The motive was profit.
There has been much argument among historians as to whether the colonial
powers were right to believe that empires would make them richer. But, like
the similar argument about the economics of the slave trade in the 18th century,
it is misplaced. The great powers thought empires would make them richer.
Those in the forefront of imperial expansion were hard-faced men who
understood only too well that it was money which made the world go round.
People like King Leopold or the British adventurer Cecil Rhodes might have
considered themselves idealists, but they were out to enrich themselves. As
Leopold wrote to the Belgian ambassador in London, ‘I do not want to miss a
chance of getting us a slice of this magnificent African cake’.29
The carve-up of the world cannot be understood without looking at what
was happening to the capitalism of the West in this period. The 1870s and
1880s were a period—often called ‘the Great Depression’—of depressed
markets, falling prices, and low profits and dividends, especially in Britain. To
British investors there seemed one way to maintain their incomes—investment
abroad. Total investment in foreign stocks rose from £95 million in 1883 to
£393 million in 1889. It soon equalled 8 percent of Britain’s gross national
product and absorbed 50 percent of savings.30 The money went mainly in
‘stocks’—fixed interest investments for the construction of railways, bridges,
harbours, docks and waterways, or for the financing of government bodies.
Whatever the investments were for, they promised a level of profitability
higher than that to be obtained at home. They also provided a market for
domestic industrial output (such as steel rails, locomotives and bridge girders)
and led to an increased flow of cheap raw materials. In this way they helped
pull British capitalism into a new period of expansion.31 Such investments
required a means to stop foreign borrowers defaulting on their payments.
Colonialism provided this through the armed force of the state.
So Britain and France jointly took charge of Egypt’s finances when its
rulers could no longer pay their debts in 1876, and in the early 1880s the
British government used armed force to establish a ‘protectorate’—in effect
absorbing Egypt into the British Empire, guaranteeing the dividends of the Suez
Canal Company and safeguarding the route to Britain’s even bigger investments
in India.
In a similar way, British forces attempted to seize control of the Transvaal
area of southern Africa, ruled by Dutch speaking Boers, after the discovery of
gold and diamond deposits. A bitter war established South Africa as a stable
protector of British business interests.
Not all investment went to the colonies. Much of British investment went
to the US, and quite a lot went to Latin American countries like Argentina. This
has led some to claim that there was no connection between overseas
investment and imperialism. However, the point is that colonies offered the
capitalists of the colonial power protected outlets for investment. They also
provided military bases to protect routes to investment elsewhere. For Britain
possessions such as Malta, Cyprus, Egypt, South Yemen and the Cape were
important not just as sources of profit in their own right, but as stopping-off
places to India—and India, ‘the jewel in the crown’, was also a stopping-off
place to Singapore, the tin and rubber of Malaya, the recently opened markets
of China, and the rich dominions of Australia and New Zealand. The empire
was like a woven garment which stopped British capitalism catching a cold: a
single thread might seem of little importance, but if it snapped the rest would
start unravelling. At least that was how those who ran the empire, their
colleagues in the City of London and their friends in British industry saw
things.
Britain was not the only imperial power. France controlled almost as much
of the world, Holland had the giant archipelago we now call Indonesia,
Belgium held an important chunk of central Africa, and the tsar had a huge area
of territory to the east, west and south of Russia proper, all the way to the
Indian border and across to the Pacific port of Vladivostok.
But Germany, the European power with the fastest industrial growth, was
left virtually without an empire. Its heavy industry was increasingly organised
through ‘trusts’—associations of companies which controlled production all
the way from the extraction of raw materials to the disposal of finished
products. They had grown up alongside the state and had none of the old small-
capitalist distrust of state power which still characterised many British
capitalists. They looked to the state to protect their domestic market through
tariffs (taxes on imports) and to aid them in carving out foreign markets.
They looked in four directions: to China, where Germany grabbed its own
treaty port; to Africa, where it was able to seize Tanganyika, Rwanda-Burundi
and South West Africa; to the Maghreb, where Germany challenged France and
Spain for control of Morocco; and to establishing a corridor, centred on a
projected Berlin-Baghdad railway, through south east Europe and Turkey to
Mesopotamia and the Persian Gulf. But in whatever direction Germany’s
capitalists and empire-builders moved, they bumped up against the networks of
colonies, bases and client states run by the established empire—against the
Russians in the Balkans, the French in north Africa, the British in the Middle
East and east Africa, and everyone in China.
To put it crudely, the growth in profitability which had produced a
recovery from the ‘Great Depression’ and enabled capitalism to concede some
improvements in living standards to its workers depended upon the spread of
empires. But as the empires spread they tended to collide with each other.
Those who ran the empires knew that the outcome of such collisions
depended upon the strength of their armed forces. Therefore, Germany set
about building battleships to challenge Britain’s domination of the seas, and
Britain retaliated by building ‘Dreadnought’ battleships of its own. France
increased military service in its conscript army from two years to three, so as
to be able to match the German military. Tsarist Russia set up state-run arms
factories, and designed its railway system with potential wars against
Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire in mind. The
drive towards war was the flipside of the illusion of stability which
imperialism brought to capitalism—and which so impressed reformist
socialists like Bernstein.
Syndicalists and revolutionaries
The struggle between classes did not stop in this period. At some points and in
some places it appeared blunted or was deflected into a purely electoral
sphere. This was especially true in the country where the socialist party was
strongest, Germany. But elsewhere there were some bitter confrontations.
There had been a wave of agitation over the working day in the US in the mid-
1880s, and there were bitter struggles in steel (the Homestead lockout of
1892), on the railroads (the Pullman strike of 1894), and in mining (the
Pennsylvania anthracite strike of 1902). The US employers smashed these
movements, using armed police and Pinkerton private detectives to shoot down
strikers.
In Britain economic recovery in the late 1880s was accompanied by a
wave of strikes and unionisation among unskilled workers, starting with the
famous ‘match girls’ strike’ in the East End of London and the dock strike of
1889. Employers took advantage of renewed economic recession in the early
1890s to destroy many of the new unions through strikebreaking (as with the
use of professional strikebreakers in Hull), starving people back to work (as in
a long strike of mainly women mill workers in Bradford), lockouts, and legal
action to seize union funds (as in the case of the Taff Vale railway strike). In
France there were some bitter strikes in the 1880s and 1890s. A six month
strike by 2,000 miners in Decazeville early in 1886 resulted in the deployment
of troops and numerous arrests, and troops fired on striking textile workers at
Fourmies in northern France on 1 May 1891, killing ten and wounding more
than 30, including children.32
There have been claims that imperialism led to the ‘bribery’ of workers in
Western Europe and North America from the profits of ‘super-exploitation’ in
the colonies—or at least to the ‘bribery’ of a privileged ‘labour aristocracy’ of
skilled workers—and that this explained the influence of reformist socialism
such as that of Bernstein. But many groups of workers received a hammering in
the peak years of colonisation, when the flow of investment out of Western
Europe was at its greatest. They were by no means all unskilled workers. In
Britain, the biggest imperialist power at the time, many of the strikes and
lockouts of the 1890s involved skilled engineers, printers, and boot and shoe
workers resisting cuts in wages and conditions. The classic working class
novel about the early 1900s, Robert Tressell’s The Ragged Trousered
Philanthropists, is about skilled painters and decorators. The stability enjoyed
by capitalism in Western Europe and North America did not come from bribing
groups of workers, but from the way in which imperialism reduced the
tendency towards crises in the system, creating an atmosphere in which reform
seemed possible and ‘practical’.
In any case, the period of relative class peace began to draw to an end
with the onset of the new century. The spread of capitalist relations entailed a
growth and transformation of the working class. Old craft industries like shoe-
making, printing, typesetting, shipbuilding and engineering were restructured in
accordance with the most up to date capitalist methods. Mining and iron and
steel production expanded everywhere; new industries like chemical and
electrical manufacturing emerged. Alongside the textile workers in the mills
which typified Britain’s industrial revolution there were now many millions of
workers in heavy industry around the world. There were also the first moves
towards mass production, based on vast numbers of semi-skilled workers tied
to the rhythms of the assembly line. In 1909 Henry Ford began selling the first
motor car aimed at a mass market, the famous Model T (or ‘Tin Lizzy’). In
1913 he opened his Highland Park plant in Detroit, with its tens of thousands
of workers. Within two decades, millions of workers in a dozen countries
would be working in similar places. Meanwhile, the system as a whole
showed signs of new economic instability. Real wages began to fall in most
industrial countries in the early 1900s. The economic crises that Bernstein had
claimed were a thing of the past returned with a vengeance.
This led to a new international wave of workers’ struggles, with a
scattering of bitter strikes in most countries. New groups of activists began to
organise along different lines to those of the established socialist parties, with
their parliamentary orientation, and the established union leaders, with their
fixation on negotiating with the employers.
The Industrial Workers of the World, formed in the US in 1905, led militant
strikes in the mining, lumbering, dock and textile industries, and organised
black, women and unskilled workers who were ignored by the established,
‘moderate’ American Federation of Labour. The Confédération Général de
Travail (CGT) in France followed a similarly militant approach, insisting that
workers’ revolution could come about through trade union methods of struggle,
and rejecting any participation in parliamentary politics. Its approach became
known internationally as ‘syndicalism’, after the French for trade union,
syndicat. The Confederación Nacional de Trabajo (CNT) in Spain was
founded by anarchists as a revolutionary alternative to the Socialist Party
leadership of the Unión General de Trabajadores (UGT). In Ireland a militant
organiser of one of the British dockers’ unions, Jim Larkin, led a massive
strike in Belfast in 1907, which united Catholics and Protestants, and even
sparked discontent among the police. Larkin then founded a new union, the
Irish Transport and General Workers Union. Back in Britain there was an
attempt to set up branches of the IWW, and Tom Mann, an engineering worker
who had played a leading role in the dock strike of 1889, returned from
Australia and South Africa to preach his own version of syndicalism based on
rank and file unity within the existing unions.
The sense that there was an alternative to the parliamentary approach
received an enormous boost from events in Russia—the revolution of 1905.
Russian tsarism had been a centre of counter-revolution ever since its role in
imposing the restoration of the old regimes in western Europe in 1814-15.
Even moderate liberals regarded it as an abomination. But tsarism came close
to collapsing in 1905. Successive waves of strikes swept through Russia after
troops opened fire on a demonstration of workers in the capital, St Petersburg.
The demonstration had been led by a priest, Father Gapon, who ran a state-
sponsored union connected to the secret police, and the workers had merely
called on their ‘Little Father’ (the tsar) to stop listening to ‘bad advisers’. But
after the shootings the tone of the strikes became increasingly revolutionary.
Socialists produced openly revolutionary newspapers. There was mutiny in the
Black Sea fleet, led by the battleship Potemkin. And there was an attempted
uprising in Moscow in December led by the militant ‘Bolshevik’ faction of the
Social Democratic Party, whose leader was Vladimir Lenin. A new sort of
organisation, based on elected delegates from the major workplaces and
presided over by the 26 year old Leon Trotsky, became the focus for the
revolutionary forces in St Petersburg. Its name, ‘soviet’, was simply the
Russian word for ‘council’, and its real significance was not fully grasped at
the time. But it represented a new way of organising revolutionary forces,
different from the journée street-based risings of the French Revolution or
even from the Paris Commune. The Commune had been based on delegates
from working class residential districts—a form of organisation which suited a
city still comprised mainly of small workshops. The soviet fitted a city
transformed by the industrialisation of the previous 30 years, with its enormous
factories.
St Petersburg was just such a city, although Russia as a whole was still
largely backward. The great mass of the population were peasants, tilling the
soil using methods that had hardly changed since late medieval times. Tsarism
was based on the aristocracy, not the class of Russian capitalists, so many of
the goals of the 1905 Revolution were the same as those of the English
Revolution of the 17th century and the French Revolution of the late 18th
century. But tsarism had been forced to encourage pockets of growth of large-
scale capitalism in order to produce arms and railway equipment, and it had
turned a couple of million people into industrial workers. Their presence
transformed the character of what would otherwise have been simply a French-
style bourgeois revolution. Most socialists in Russia did not realise this. A
large number believed Russia could avoid going through capitalism at all and
move straight to a form of socialism based on the peasant village. All that was
required was armed action to break the power of the state. These socialists
were known as narodniks (‘friends of the people’), and formed the Social
Revolutionary Party. There were Marxists who saw that capitalism was
developing, but many belonged to the ‘Menshevik’ tendency of the Social
Democratic Party, which believed workers merely had to help the bourgeoisie
make its revolution. Even Lenin’s Bolsheviks spoke of a ‘bourgeois
democratic revolution’. But Leon Trotsky went further: he said that the
involvement of workers could make the revolution ‘permanent’—a phrase first
used by Marx after 1848. They had necessarily shifted the revolutionary
movement from raising simply democratic demands to raising socialist
demands.33
In Western Europe it was Rosa Luxemburg who best appreciated the
importance of 1905, having experienced it first hand in Russian-occupied
Warsaw. In her pamphlet The Mass Strike,34 she argued that it showed how
strike movements could spontaneously begin to raise political questions,
opening up a non-parliamentary strategy for change. Her arguments received
little hearing inside the German socialist movement, and the crushing of the
revolution by tsarism seemed to reduce their importance.
Yet the years after 1910 were to see a rash of fresh strikes, bigger and
more bitter, in North America and Western Europe. In the US there was the
famous Lawrence strike in Massachusetts, where 20,000 women workers from
a dozen national backgrounds followed the lead of IWW agitators Elizabeth
Gurley Flynn and Big Bill Haywood. In Britain there was the ‘Great Unrest’,
centred on huge strikes on the railways, in the ports and in the mines, but
spilling over into dozens of industries, often involving unskilled, non-
unionised workers. In Ireland there was the five month Dublin Lockout of
transport and other workers in 1913. In Italy there was Ancona’s ‘Red Week’
of bloody clashes between workers and the police after an anti-militarist
demonstration, a strike of 50,000 metal workers in Turin (where two workers
were killed by soldiers), and a wave of agitation across northern Italy which it
took 100,000 troops to suppress.35 Even in Germany, where the general level
of struggle was still below the European average, there was a bitter miners’
strike in the Ruhr. Finally, in Russia, a massacre of striking gold miners in
Lena in 1912 was followed by a resurgence in workers’ struggles, permitting
the two rival factions of the Social Democratic Party to produce semi-legal
newspapers, and culminating in the raising of barricades in St Petersburg in the
summer of 1914.
The time when imperialism’s bloody adventures in the colonies could
stabilise the system at its centre was passing. But before anyone had a chance
to see where this would lead, blood was to be shed on an unprecedented scale
across Europe.
The road to war
The fact that imperialism meant wars between colonial powers as well as the
enslavement of colonised peoples had been shown as early as 1904, when
Russia’s drive east towards the Pacific led it into direct conflict, in northern
China, with Japan’s drive west through Korea. Its defeat in the war which
followed helped precipitate the 1905 Revolution. Twice it seemed as if a
similar clash of interests in Morocco might lead to war between France and
Germany, in 1906 and 1911.
But the truly dangerous area was south east Europe, the Balkans, where
each of the Great Powers regarded particular local states as its clients. There
were wars between these states in 1912 and 1913. First Serbia, Greece,
Montenegro and Bulgaria fell upon the remaining Turkish territories of
Macedonia and Thrace, leaving Turkey with only Istanbul and a narrow strip
of eastern Thrace. Then Greece, Serbia and Romania, encouraged by the Great
Powers, fell upon Bulgaria. The wars were marked by atrocities on all sides.
Sections of the urban middle classes wanted to create and expand ‘modern’
linguistically uniform national states. But the rural populations were almost
everywhere mixtures of different ethnic groups speaking different dialects and
languages. The only way to carve out secure ‘ethnically pure’ national states
was through wars involving the expulsion and even extermination of civilians
who did not fit the necessary criteria. The first war ended in the Treaty of
London, and the second in the Treaty of Bucharest. But these did nothing to
remove the underlying pressures leading to war, and the same pressures
existed in much of Austro-Hungarian Eastern Europe as in the former Ottoman
areas. The whole region was a gigantic explosive cocktail.
Just how explosive was shown in July 1914, when the Austrian Archduke
Franz Ferdinand paid an official visit to Sarajevo, the capital of the Austrian-
run province of Bosnia. He was assassinated by a nationalist who stood for
driving out the Austrians and integrating the province into neighbouring Serbia.
What happened next is well known: the Austrian government declared war
on Serbia; the Russian government feared a challenge to its own position and
declared war on Austria; Germany identified its interests with Austria’s and
moved against Russia; France felt it had to prevent Germany defeating Russia
and becoming the dominant European power; Britain threw its weight behind
France and went to war against Germany, using the movement of German
troops through Belgium as an excuse. Within a week, 44 years of peace in
Western Europe—the longest period anyone could recall—had given way to a
war involving all the major states.
Wars, like revolutions, often seem to be triggered by the most minor of
events. This leads people to see them as accidental, a result of a random chain
of misjudgements and misunderstandings. But, in fact, the minor events are
significant because they come to symbolise the balance between great social or
political forces. A sparkplug is one of the cheapest components in a motor car,
and cannot move anything by itself. But it can ignite the explosive force of
petrol vapour in the engine. In the same way, an assassination or a tax rise can
be of little importance in itself, but can bring about clashes between states or
great social forces.
Behind the long chain of diplomatic activity in the summer of 1914 lay a
very simple fact. The rival imperialisms which had emerged as each
capitalism tried to solve its own problems by expanding across state
boundaries now collided right across the world. Economic competition had
turned into competition for territories, and the outcome depended on armed
might. No state could afford to back down once the chain of confrontations had
been set off by the Sarajevo assassination, because no state could risk a
weakening of its global strength. The same imperialism which had stimulated
economic growth and a belief in the inevitability of progress was now to tear
the heart of Europe apart.
Chapter 2
World war and world revolution
4 August 1914
Almost everyone involved in the war thought it would be short. The German
crown prince spoke of a ‘bright and jolly war’. He expected a repetition of the
Franco-Prussian War of 1870, when the French army was defeated within
weeks. French soldiers wrote ‘à Berlin’ on the railway carriages taking them
to the front. ‘It will all be over by Christmas’ was the common British refrain.
At first the war was popular. Rosa Luxemburg in Berlin witnessed ‘the
mad delirium…patriotic street demonstrations…singing throngs, coffee shops
with their patriotic songs…violent mobs ready to whip themselves into
delirious frenzy over every wild rumour…trains filled with reservists…pull
out amid the joyous cries of enthusiastic maidens’.36 Trotsky wrote, ‘The
patriotic enthusiasm of the masses in Austria-Hungary seemed especially
surprising…I strode along the main streets of the familiar Vienna and watched
a most amazing crowd fill the fashionable Ring…porters, laundresses, shoe-
makers, apprentices and youngsters from the suburbs’.37 In London ‘an
immense and tremendously enthusiastic crowd’ gathered outside Buckingham
Palace’ on 4 August.38 Victor Serge, in a French prison, described how
‘passionate singing of the “Marseillaise”, from crowds seeing troops off to the
train, drifted across even to our jail. We could hear shouts of “To Berlin! To
Berlin!’39 Even in St Petersburg the strikes and barricades of only a few days
earlier seemed forgotten. The British ambassador Buchanan later spoke of
‘those wonderful early August days’ when ‘Russia seemed to have been
completely transformed’.40
The popularity of the war was not necessarily as deeply engrained among
the mass of people as the enthusiastic demonstrations and singing of patriotic
songs suggested. Historian David Blackbourn writes of Germany, ‘The
patriotic demonstrations of late July involved relatively small groups, with
students and young salesmen prominent. Working class areas like the Ruhr
were quiet…Older observers noted a contrast with the enthusiasm of 1870’.41
Shlyapnikov, a revolutionary worker in St Petersburg, contrasted the
enthusiasm for the war among the middle and upper classes with the more
subdued mood in the factories:
The St Petersburg press did much to kindle popular chauvinism. They skilfully
blew up ‘German’ atrocities against Russian women and old men remaining in
Germany. But even this hostile atmosphere did not drive workers to an excess
of nationalism.42
Ralph Fox told how, as a young worker in London, it was possible to
organise weekly anti-war meetings in Finsbury Park.43
Trotsky explained the mood more as a reaction to people’s normal
humdrum lives than any deep-seated nationalism:
The people whose lives, day in day out, pass in the monotony of hopelessness
are many; they are the mainstay of modern society. The alarm of mobilisation
breaks into their lives like a promise; the familiar and long-hated is
overthrown, and the new and unusual reigns in its place. Changes still more
incredible are in store for them in the future. For better or worse? For better, of
course—what can seem worse than ‘normal’ conditions?…War affects
everybody, and those who are oppressed and deceived by life consequently
feel that they are on an equal footing with the rich and powerful.44
Different social classes are never fully segregated from one another. The
mood of those at the top influences those just below them, and the mood of
those in the middle influences those at the bottom. The determination of
Europe’s ruling classes to go to war with one another was transmitted in a
thousand ways to the middle classes and sections of the working class—
through patriotic speeches and newspaper stories about ‘enemy atrocities’,
through marching bands and popular songs, and through declarations by
novelists, poets and philosophers. The German historian Meinecke described
the outbreak of the war as filling him with ‘the profoundest joy’. The radical
French novelist Anatole France recalled (with a sense of shame) making ‘little
speeches to the soldiers’. The philosopher Bergson described the war as one
of ‘civilisation against barbarism’. The English poet Rupert Brooke wrote that
‘nobleness walks in our ways again’,45 and the novelist H G Wells enthused
about a ‘war to end war’. Schoolteachers repeated such statements to
adolescent boys, urging them to go off and fight. Anyone who dissented was
guilty of ‘stabbing our boys in the back’.
There were still wide groups of workers who could be expected to resist
such pressures. Socialist movements and groups of trade union militants were
accustomed to lies in the press and attacks on their principles. Many had
flocked to rallies of thousands in London, Paris and Berlin on the eve of the
war to hear their leaders call for peace. But once war broke out, those same
leaders rushed to support it. The German and Austrian Social Democrats, the
British Labour Party and TUC, the French Socialist Guesde and the syndicalist
Jouhaux, the veteran Russian Marxist Plekhanov and the veteran Russian
anarchist Kropotkin—all were united in their willingness to back their rulers
against others. Those who had doubts—for instance, Kautsky and Haase in
Germany, and Keir Hardie in Britain—kept quiet in order to preserve ‘party
unity’ and to avoid being accused of betraying ‘the nation’. ‘A nation at war
must be united,’ wrote Hardie. ‘The boys who have gone forth to fight their
country’s battles must not be disheartened by any discordant note at home’.46
Decades of abiding by the rules of capitalist democracy were having their
effect. Pursuit of reform within the structures of the capitalist state led to
identification with that state in its military conflicts. In the warring countries
only the Serbian Socialists and the Russian Bolsheviks came out in unremitting
hostility to the war. The Italian Socialists also opposed the war when Italy
finally allied itself with Britain, France and Russia. But their attitude owed
much to a split within the Italian ruing class over which side to support—and
the left wing editor of the party’s daily paper, a certain Benito Mussolini, split
away to wage virulently pro-war agitation.
The belief in a quick victory proved completely misplaced. In the first
months of the war the German army did manage to race through Belgium and
northern France to within 50 miles of Paris, and the Russian army advanced far
into German East Prussia. But both were then forced back. The Germans
retreated before the French and British armies at the Battle of the Marne to
form a defensive line of trenches some 30 miles back. The Russians suffered
heavy losses at the Battle of Tannenberg and were driven from German
territory. The ‘war of manoeuvre’ (of quick-moving armies) became a war of
attrition, with each side suffering enormous losses as it attempted to break
through the strongly entrenched positions of the other side. The expected four
months of hostilities turned into more than four years, and spread from the
eastern and western fronts to Turkey, Mesopotamia, the Italian-Austrian border
and northern Greece.
The war was the bloodiest yet in human history, with about ten million
dead—1.8 million in Germany, 1.7 million in Russia, 1.4 million in France,
1.3 million in Austria-Hungary, 740,000 in Britain and 615,000 in Italy. France
lost one in five males of fighting age, Germany one in eight. Over 23 million
shells were fired during the five month Battle of Verdun—two million men
took part, and half of them were killed. Yet neither side made any gains. One
million died in the four month Battle of the Somme in 1916, with Britain losing
20,000 men on the first day.
The war also caused extreme dislocation in society as a whole. By 1915
and 1916 all the contending powers realised they were involved in a total war.
The outcome depended on directing all national resources towards the
battlefront, virtually regardless of the effects on living standards. Industries
producing consumer goods had to be turned over to producing munitions.
Substitutes had to be found for foodstuffs and raw materials previously
imported from enemy countries or subject to naval blockades. Workers had to
be shifted from industry to industry, and a fresh supply of labour power found
to replace those sent to the front. Agricultural workers had to be drafted into
armies, even if it caused acute food shortages—in Germany the winter of 1917
became known as the ‘turnip winter’, as the vegetable replaced most other
foods. The diet of the average German worker provided only 1,313 calories a
day, a third below the level needed for long term survival, and there were
some 750,000 deaths through malnutrition.47 Everywhere governments could
only finance their military expenditures by printing money. Shortages of food
and basic goods led to escalating prices and increased grumbling among the
mass of the population.
It became clear to generals and politicians alike that success in the war
depended on the state taking control of much of the economy, regardless of the
‘free market’ economic orthodoxy. There was a sharp escalation in the trend
towards the integration of monopolised industry and the state, which was
already visible in some countries before the war. By 1917 a British war
cabinet report acknowledged that state control had extended ‘until it covered
not only national activities directly affecting the war effort, but every section
of industry’.48 By the end of the war the government purchased about 90
percent of all imports, marketed more than 80 percent of food consumed at
home, and controlled most prices.49 In Germany generals Hindenburg and
Ludendorff exercised a virtual dictatorship over much of the economy in the
later stages of the war, working through the bosses of the great monopoly
trusts.50
Both the generals and the industrialists could see that acquiring territory
would increase the economic resources at their disposal. There was a general
redefinition of war aims to include not just grabbing or defending colonies in
Asia or Africa, but also seizing areas, particularly industrial or semi-industrial
areas, in Europe. For Germany this meant annexing the iron-ore producing
regions of French Lorraine, establishing German control over Belgium, central
Europe and Romania, and building a German sphere of influence in Turkey and
the Middle East around the Berlin-Baghdad railway.51 For France it meant
reconquering Alsace-Lorraine and establishing some sort of control over the
Rhineland region of Germany. For Russia it meant the annexation of Istanbul
(promised in a secret treaty by Britain). Just as individual capitalists looked to
expand their capital through economic competition, groups of capitalists tied
together by national states looked to expand their capital through military
competition and warfare. Imperialism was no longer just about colonies,
although they remained important. It was now a total system in which no one
capitalism could survive without trying to expand at the expense of others—a
system whose logic was total militarisation and total war, regardless of the
social dislocation this caused.
The dislocation had momentous effects on the working class, the
traditional petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry. There were sudden and
sometimes catastrophic falls in living standards. In Germany by 1917, men’s
‘real’ wages had fallen by more than one fifth in war industries and by almost
half in civilian industries.52 Old methods of defending pay and conditions
disappeared as trade union leaders threw their weight behind the war effort
and opposed all strikes, and harsh penalties were introduced for anyone who
broke the ‘truce’. In Britain strike leaders faced imprisonment under the
Defence of the Realm Act; in Germany alleged agitators were conscripted en
masse to the front.
There was also enormous dislocation in the patterns of working class life.
Half of working class men were plucked out of their old jobs and communities
to be dispatched to the front and replaced at work by a vast influx of women. In
Germany the number of women in industrial enterprises with more than ten
employees rose by half to just over two million.53 In Britain the number of
women in munitions factories alone rose to 800,000.54 Capitalism’s drive to
war was breaking apart the stereotypical family which the system had tried so
hard to impose. In the long term this would spread the attitudes previously
characteristic of groups such as textile workers to much wider layers of
working class women, giving them a new sense of equality with men. But the
immediate effect was to double the burden which they had to cope with. They
had somehow to juggle long hours in a factory with bringing up children on
their own. It was often as much as they could do to keep body and soul
together.
Hardship, confusion, disorientation and an inability to defend traditional
ways of working and living—such were the conditions in working class
localities in the first years of the war. As living standards fell, working hours
were extended, conditions in the factories grew more dangerous, and the
number of strikes dropped sharply. But by 1915 and 1916 the desperation was
also breeding resistance. There were spontaneous protests in working class
communities which were suffering—mainly from the women in those
communities. The great rent strike in Glasgow in 1915 or the local protests
over food shortages in many German towns in the winters of 1916 and 1917
were typical. There were also growing numbers of strikes among the male
workers who had been least hit by the pressure to join the armed forces—the
skilled metal workers, who were regarded as essential to the war effort. Their
networks of union activists—the shop stewards in cities like Glasgow,
Sheffield, Berlin, Budapest and Vienna—remained intact. As the hardship
increased, the two sorts of protest began to connect both with one another and
with a certain questioning of the war. The leaders of the strikes were often
socialists who opposed the war, even if many of the strikers still felt they had
to support ‘their own side’.
Meanwhile, the millions of men at the various fronts were undergoing
experiences for which nothing in life had prepared them. They soon discovered
that the war was not a pleasant jaunt to Berlin or Paris, or some great
adventure. It was mud, boredom, bad food and the horror of death all around
them. For the working class or peasant conscripts of ‘the poor bloody
infantry’, it also involved the knowledge that life was very different for the
generals and staff officers, with good food and wine, comfortable billets and
conscripted men to wait on them. This did not lead to automatic rebellion.
Many of the conscripts came from backgrounds with no tradition of resistance
to orders from above. Habits of deference and obedience hammered into their
heads since early childhood could lead to men doggedly accepting their fate,
and treating it as just another boring and distasteful job they had to do—
especially since any act of resistance would be met with the full weight of
military ‘justice’. ‘The strange look on all faces’ of the men waiting to go back
to the front, noted the British officer and war poet Wilfred Owen, ‘was not
despair or terror, it was more terrible than terror, for it was a blindfold look,
and without expression, like a dead rabbit’s’.55
Yet the possibility of rebellion was always there. The generals noted with
horror what happened on Christmas Day 1914, when British and German
soldiers climbed out of the trenches to fraternise with each other. British
officers were ordered to shoot on sight any German soldier who emerged to
fraternise during Christmas 1916.56 Such precautions could not stop the sudden
explosion of huge mutinies. The first great eruption on the Western Front was
in France in April 1917. An estimated 68 divisions, half the French army,
refused to return to the front after an offensive which had cost 250,000 lives. A
combination of concessions and repression—the imposition of 500 death
sentences and 49 actual executions—restored discipline, but only after some
units had raised the red flag and sang the revolutionary anthem, the
Internationale. Mutinies elsewhere in the west were not on the same scale as
among the French. But 1917 also saw mutinies involving some 50,000 soldiers
in Italy, and five days of bloody rebellion by up to 100,000 soldiers in the
British base camp at Étaples, near Boulogne. The British generals ended the
rebellion by making concessions and then executed its leaders, keeping the
whole affair secret.57
The mutinies were part of a growing mood of confusion and dissatisfaction
across Europe. It was by no means confined to industrial workers. It also
affected many of the middle class who held junior officer rank in the armies.
Some sense of it is found in the work of the British war poets, and in
disillusioned post-war writings such as Remarque’s All Quiet on the Western
Front, Hemingway’s A Farewell to Arms, Barbusse’s Under Fire, or
Myrivillis’s Life in the Tomb. Such feelings could lead people to identify with
the revolutionary left, as happened to the German playwright Ernst Toller. But
it could also lead to forms of right wing nationalism which blamed the
collapse of hope in the war on corruption, betrayal and the influence of ‘alien’
forces.
Finally, war dragged the vast numbers of peasants conscripted into the
French, Italian, Austro-Hungarian and Russian armies out of their isolated
villages and into the turmoil and horror of mechanised warfare. In an era
before modern mass communications had penetrated most of the European
countryside, the peasant conscripts were subject to experiences and ideas they
had never come across before. Many were forced to accept some label of
national identity for the first time as they found themselves speaking local
dialects in the midst of multinational armies. As they attempted to make sense
of what was happening they could be pulled in contradictory directions—
influenced by priests practising traditional rites, middle class nationalists
speaking similar dialects to themselves, or workers alongside them in the
trenches putting socialist arguments and giving some coherence to old
resentments against the rich.
Such were the feelings of a vast, bewildered, bitter mass of armed men in
the trenches and barracks as the European states tore at each other’s flesh.
February 1917
‘We of the older generation may not live to see the decisive battles of the
coming revolution,’ the exiled Lenin told a meeting of young German speaking
workers in Zurich in January 1917. He said this after arguing that revolution
was, nonetheless, inevitable. ‘Europe is pregnant with revolution,’ he said.
‘The coming years in Europe, precisely because of the predatory war, will
lead to popular uprisings under the leadership of the proletariat’.58
The first rising occurred just six weeks later in Petrograd,59 capital of the
Russian Empire. The tsar, whose power seemed unchallengeable on the
morning of 23 February,60 abdicated on the morning of 2 March. By November
a revolutionary government headed by Lenin was running the country.
No one expected a revolution on 23 February. The day was celebrated by
socialists as International Working Women’s Day—a tradition established in
1910 following a call from the German socialist women’s leader Clara Zetkin.
The underground socialist groups in Petrograd marked it with leaflets,
speeches and meetings, but none called for strikes, fearing that the time was not
ripe for militant action.61 But the bitterness at bread shortages among women
textile workers, many with husbands in the army, was such that they went on
strike anyway and marched through the factory areas. A worker from the Nobel
engineering factory later recounted:
We could hear women’s voices: ‘Down with the high prices!’ ‘Down with
hunger!’ ‘Bread for the workers’…Masses of women workers in a militant
frame of mind filled the lane. Those who caught sight of us began to wave their
arms, shouting, ‘Come out!’ ‘Stop work!’ Snowballs flew through the
windows. We decided to join the revolution.62
The next day the movement had grown to involve half the city’s 400,000
workers, with processions from the factories to the city centre, and the slogans
had changed from, ‘Bread!’ to, ‘Down with the autocracy’, and, ‘Down with
the war.’ Armed police attacked the protests and the government tried to use
the many thousands of troops in the city’s barracks, waiting to go to the front, to
break them up. But on the fourth day of strikes and demonstrations a wave of
mutinies swept through the barracks. Masses of workers and soldiers
intermingled and swept through the city’s streets with guns and red flags,
arresting police and government officials. Regiments sent by train to restore
order went over to the revolution on entering the city. A desperate attempt to
return to the city by the tsar was thwarted by railway workers. Similar
movements swept Moscow and other Russian cities. The tsar’s generals told
him there was no chance of maintaining order anywhere unless he abdicated.
What was to replace the tsar? Two parallel bodies emerged to take on
government functions, operating alongside each other from different wings of
the Tauride Palace in Petrograd. On the one hand, there was the official
opposition within tsarism, the bourgeois politicians of the old state Duma,
chosen by a class-based electoral system which gave the overwhelming
majority of seats to the propertied classes. On the other, there were workers’
delegates, drawn together in a workers’ council, or soviet, modelled on that of
1905. The key question was which of these rival bodies would take power into
its hands. In February those in the Duma were able to form a provisional
government with the acquiescence of the soviets. In October the soviet
majority was to form a government of its own.
The key figures in the Duma had been critical collaborators with tsarism
since the outbreak of the war, working with it to organise the war industries
and profiting accordingly, but resentful at the domination of a corrupt court
clique around the tsarina and her recently assassinated favourite, Rasputin.
They had wanted minor reforms within the tsarist system, certainly not its
overthrow. As one of their leading figures, Rodzianko, later told:
The moderate parties not only did not desire a revolution, but were simply
afraid of it. In particular the Party of People’s Freedom, the ‘Kadets’, as a
party standing on the left wing of the moderate group, and therefore having
more than the rest a point of contact with the revolutionary parties of the
country, was more worried by the advancing catastrophe than all the rest.63
In the English, American and French revolutions, and again in 1848, large
sections of the propertied classes had turned against the upheavals as they took
a radical twist. But they had played some initiating role in the movements. In
Russia in 1917 their fear of the industrial workers stopped them doing even
this. As the Menshevik historian of the revolution, Sukhanov, wrote, ‘Our
bourgeoisie, unlike the others, betrayed the people not the day after the
overturn but even before the overturn took place’.64
Leaders of the Duma like Rodzianko and Miliukov were negotiating to
reform the monarchy right up until the very moment of the tsar’s abdication. Yet
they nominated the government that replaced him—a government led by a
Prince L’vov and dominated by major landowners and industrialists. It
contained just one figure with any revolutionary credentials at all, a lawyer
who had made his name defending political prisoners, Kerensky.
The workers’ delegates of the soviet met initially because of the need to
establish some coordination between the activities of different sections of
workers. Once rebel regiments sent their delegates to join the workers’
assembly, it became the focus of the whole revolutionary movement. Its elected
executive had to take in hand much of the actual running of the city: providing
food supplies to the mutinying soldiers; overseeing the arrest of the old police
and officials; arranging for each factory to send one in ten of its workers to a
militia to maintain revolutionary order; establishing a newspaper which would
let people know what was happening at a time when the whole press was
strike-bound. Groups of workers and soldiers would turn to the soviet for
instructions—and all the time soviets which had sprung up elsewhere in the
country were affiliating to the Petrograd soviet. In effect it became the
government of the revolution. But it was a government which refused to take
formal power and waited for the Duma leaders to do so.
The workers’ delegates in the soviet were to a greater or lesser extent
influenced by the underground socialist parties. Wartime repression had all but
destroyed their organisational structures, but the impact of their ideas and the
standing of their imprisoned, exiled or underground leaders remained.
However, these parties did not use their influence in the first days of the
revolution to argue against the soviet accepting a government chosen by the
Duma leaders. The Marxist parties, the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, disagreed
repeatedly over tactics. In 1905 the Mensheviks had followed a policy of
waiting for the bourgeoisie to take the initiative, whereas the Bolsheviks had
insisted workers had to push the bourgeois revolution forward. During the war
many Mensheviks had argued for the defence of Russia against Germany and
Austria, while Bolsheviks and ‘internationalist’ Mensheviks had opposed any
support for the war. But they agreed on the character of the coming revolution
—it was to be a bourgeois revolution.
This led the first leading Bolshevik figures to arrive in Petrograd, Stalin
and Molotov, to accept the bourgeois provisional government chosen by the
Duma. From this it also followed that they could no longer call for an
immediate end to the war, since it was no longer a war waged on behalf of
tsarism but a war of ‘revolutionary defence’. The only well-known
revolutionary to have characterised the revolution differently, to insist it could
be a proletarian revolution, had been Leon Trotsky. But he was in exile in
America in February and had no party of his own, belonging instead to a loose
socialist grouping standing between the Mensheviks and Bolsheviks.
The workers’ delegates to the soviet were not happy with the composition
of the new government. They distrusted Prince L’vov and the collection of
landowners and industrialists around him. But they did not have the confidence
to tell experienced political leaders with an apparent knowledge of Marxism
that they were wrong.
The soldiers’ delegates were even more easily won to support the
government than the workers’ delegates. Most had never taken political action
before. They had been brought up to defer to their ‘betters’, and even though
bitter experience had made them turn against the tsar and the senior officers,
they still deferred to those above who seemed on the same side as themselves
—to the many regimental junior officers and the provisional government,
which had learned to use the language of the revolution only a couple of days
after themselves.
The failure of the provisional government
The provisional government was to last, in one form or another, only eight
months before it was overthrown by a second revolution. After the event, its
failure was ascribed by its supporters to the machinations of Lenin. They
claimed Russia would have moved to a form of parliamentary democracy, and
industrialised painlessly, if only it had been given the chance. Their version of
events has gained new popularity in the decade since the collapse of the Soviet
Union. Yet it does not accord with real developments in 1917.
As the tsar fell, the bourgeois forces behind the provisional government
were pushing in one direction, while the masses who made the revolution were
pushing in the opposite direction. The gap between them grew wider with
every week that passed.
Russia’s capitalists were determined to continue with the very policies
which had driven the workers of Petrograd to rise and the soldiers to back the
rising. Tsarism had thrown backward, semi-medieval Russia into a war with
Germany, the second most advanced capitalism in the world. The result was
bound to be economic dislocation on a massive scale, enormous losses at the
front, a breakdown in food deliveries to the cities and impoverishment of the
urban workforce. Yet the new government was as determined to persist with
the war as the old, since Russia’s capitalists were just as keen on expanding
the empire across the Black Sea to Istanbul and the Mediterranean as any
tsarist general. Their great industries were monopolies run in conjunction with
the state, their national markets restricted by the backwardness of agriculture
and the poverty of the peasants. What better way to expand those markets than
by expanding the borders of the state? They could see no logic but the logic of
imperialist war, whatever degree of dislocation it caused. The provisional
government continued to accept this, even when it was restructured to give
ministerial posts to the ‘moderate’ socialist parties, with Kerensky as prime
minister. ‘Even many left wing members of the provisional government
secretly agreed with…[the] aims’ of carving out a new empire, including the
Dardanelles and ‘satellite’ states in Eastern Europe.65
Continuity in military policy was matched by continuity in policy towards
the empire’s non-Russian speaking peoples—more than half the total
population. There were traditions of rebellion in Poland, Finland, parts of the
Caucasus and, to a lesser degree, the Ukraine. The tsars had used repression
and enforced Russification to try and stamp out any movement for self
determination. The new government, fearful of losing markets and supplies of
raw materials, continued this approach.
Tsarism had given the great landowners half the country’s land, and the old
regime had used the full force of the state against any attempt to divide the
large estates. The capitalist interests entrenched in the new government were
just as hard-headed. Ministers might make speeches about eventual reform, but
they insisted that the peasantry must wait in the meantime.
Their policies meant discontent would grow, with or without the
Bolsheviks. No one had given the order for the February rising. In the same
way, no one ordered the peasants to attack the houses of the great landowners
and divide up the land throughout the summer. No one gave orders to the Finns,
the Ukrainians, or the peoples of the Caucasus and the Baltic to demand states
of their own. And no one told millions of peasants in uniform to desert the
front. People who had seen protests topple a 500 year old monarchy did not
need anyone to tell them they should try to solve other grievances, especially
when many of them guns and had been trained to use them.
The provisional government fanned the flames itself. It showed its real
ambition in June, when it tried to launch a military offensive into Austrian
Silesia. Discontent soared in the armed forces, especially as Kerensky tried to
reimpose tsarist discipline, including capital punishment. The offensive also
added to the chaos in the economy. Prices had already almost quadrupled
between 1914 and 1917. By October they had doubled again. Deliveries of
food to the cities fell, and hunger grew. As right wing historian Norman Stone
has pointed out:
Russia did not go Bolshevik because the masses were Bolshevik from the start
of the revolution, or because of the machinations of soviet or Bolshevik
leaders. She went Bolshevik because the old order collapsed more or less as
Lenin—uniquely—had foretold. By the autumn the towns were starving and
disease-ridden; stratospheric inflation deprived wage increases, indeed the
whole economic life of the country, of any meaning; production of war goods
fell back, so that the army could not fight, even if it wanted to. Mines,
railways, factories seized up…Economic chaos drove Russia towards
Bolshevism.
Bolshevism might have been avoided if there had been any alternative; but
the collapse of capitalism was there for all to see.66
The parties and the revolution
The October Revolution was not simply a result of the mechanical
development of inhuman forces, however. It depended on the mass of people—
the workers, peasants and soldiers—acting in a certain way in response to
these forces. It was here that Lenin and the Bolsheviks played a decisive role.
Without them there would still have been strikes, protests, the seizure of
factories by workers, peasant attacks on the property of landlords, mutinies,
and revolts among non-Russian nationalities. But these would not
automatically have fused into a single movement attempting a conscious
transformation of society.
Instead, they might easily have turned in on one another, allowing
unemployed workers, desperate soldiers and confused peasants to fall prey to
waves of anti-Semitic and Russian nationalist agitation promoted by remnants
of the old order. Under such circumstances, success would certainly have been
possible for someone like General Kornilov, who attempted to march on
Petrograd in August, to impose a military dictatorship. Capitalist democracy
had no chance of survival in the Russia of 1917, but that did not rule out a
starving, despairing population allowing a right wing dictatorship to build on
their despair. As Trotsky once observed, the fascism born in Italy in 1922
could easily have been born under another name in Russia in late 1917 or
1918.
What made the difference was that a revolutionary socialist party had won
the allegiance of a significant minority of Russia’s workers in the decade and a
half before the revolution. Large factories had grown up in Petrograd and a
few other cities, despite the backwardness of the country as whole. In 1914
half of Petrograd’s 250,000 industrial workers had jobs in enterprises of more
than 500 workers, a higher proportion than in the advanced capitalisms of the
West.67 They provided fertile ground for socialist propaganda and agitation
from the 1890s onwards.
Lenin differed from most other socialist leaders of his generation (he was
47 at the time of the revolution) in his insistence that the aim of agitation
should not be to win passive support for left wing intellectuals or
organisations of a trade union sort, but to build a network of activists within
the working class committed to an insurrection against tsarism. This led him to
break with former colleagues such as Martov, Dan and Axelrod, despite
apparent agreement on the bourgeois character of the expected revolution. The
Bolsheviks were seen as the ‘harder’ of the two Marxist parties—more
insistent on delineating the revolutionary party from the middle class
intelligentsia or trade union functionaries, and on hammering out theoretical
issues so as to arrive at a clarity of purpose. By the summer of 1914 the
Bolsheviks were the larger party among Petrograd’s workers, producing a
legal paper, Pravda, and winning most of the votes for the workers’
representatives in the Duma.68 The war made the differences between the
parties even clearer. The Bolsheviks came out solidly against the war
(although many would not go as far as backing Lenin’s ‘revolutionary
defeatism’), and their Duma deputies were thrown into prison. Many
Mensheviks supported the war, with a minority associated with Martov, the
‘Menshevik internationalists’, opposed to it but maintaining links with the
majority.69
There was a third party, which was to have more influence among
Petrograd’s workers and soldiers in the first months of 1917 than either the
Bolsheviks or Mensheviks—the Social Revolutionaries. This was not a
Marxist party, but came out of the Russian ‘populist’ tradition which stressed
on the one hand the demands of the peasantry, and on the other the role of a
heroic armed minority in stirring up revolutionary ferment by exemplary
actions (for example by the assassination of unpopular police chiefs). Its best-
known leaders tended to come from the middle class, and in 1917 they
supported the war and the provisional government, failing even to implement
their own programme of land reform. By the autumn, a number of lesser known
leaders, the ‘Left Social Revolutionaries’, had split away under the impact of
the rising discontent with the government.
The Social Revolutionaries had much greater strength than the Bolsheviks
in the Petrograd soviet in February. The Bolsheviks had suffered
disproportionately from tsarist repression, and many workers and soldiers did
not see the relevance of old party distinctions in the new situation. But many
individual Bolshevik workers played a notable part in the February uprising,
and the party had a solid core of members in the factories and working class
areas—100 members in the giant Putilov plant, 500 in the Vyborg industrial
district, with 2,000 in the city as a whole at the beginning of March. It grew
rapidly with the revolution, so that its membership in the city was 16,000 by
late April.70 With a membership of around one worker in 30, Bolshevik
agitation and propaganda reached into most sections of most factories in the
city. By late May it could win 20 percent of the votes in the Petrograd local
government elections (against 3.4 percent for the Mensheviks and around 50
percent for the Social Revolutionaries).71
The party’s members were confused by its support for the provisional
government in February and March. The situation was only clarified when
Lenin returned from exile in April. He could see that Russian capitalism could
not solve any of the country’s problems, and that its policies were bound to
worsen the conditions of workers, peasants and soldiers alike. He responded
by developing an argument very close to that of Trotsky—one previously
rejected by the ‘orthodox’ Bolsheviks. He pointed out that the working class
had played the decisive role in overthrowing tsarism and, in the soviets, had
created a far more democratic way of making decisions than any existing under
bourgeois rule. The working class had the possibility of moving straight
forward to impose policies in the interests of itself and the poorer peasants.
But the precondition for this was that the soviets take full power, replacing the
old army and police with a workers’ militia, nationalising the banks and giving
land to the poorer peasants.
The Bolshevik Party did not operate as a dictatorship, and Lenin’s
arguments were at first vehemently attacked by many of the old Bolsheviks in
the city. But they found an immediate echo among members in industrial
districts such as Vyborg. He articulated clearly what they already felt in a
confused way. He did for the militant section of Russia’s workers what Tom
Paine’s Common Sense did for people in the American colonies early in 1776,
or what Marat’s L’Ami du Peuple had done for many Parisian sans culottes in
1792-93—providing a view of the world that made sense in a situation which
contradicted all the old beliefs. He helped masses of people move from being
angry victims of circumstance to active subjects of history.
It only took Lenin a couple of weeks to win over the bulk of the party. But
it took rather longer to win over the mass of workers, let alone the soldiers and
peasants. At first, he told party members, they had to ‘patiently explain’ the
need to overthrow the provisional government and end the war. The
Bolsheviks could not achieve these aims as a minority which had not yet won
over the majority of workers. The behaviour of the provisional government and
the spontaneous struggles of workers, peasants and soldiers would ensure that
the ‘explaining’ was effective. The Bolshevik vote in municipal and
parliamentary elections rose in Petrograd from 20 percent in May to 33 percent
in August and 45 percent in November. In Moscow it rose from 11.5 percent in
June to 51 percent in late September. At the first all-Russian soviet congress in
early June, the Bolsheviks had 13 percent of delegates. At the second congress
on 25 October, they had 53 percent—and another 21 percent went to the Left
Social Revolutionaries allied to them.72
More was involved than persuading people to mark one set of names rather
than another on an electoral slate. The Bolsheviks involved themselves in
every workers’ struggle—to keep wages abreast with inflation, to fight
deteriorating conditions, and to prevent managers shutting plants and causing
economic chaos.73 They encouraged soldiers to challenge the power of their
officers, and peasants to divide up the land. The Bolsheviks set out to prove to
the exploited and oppressed that they themselves had the power and the ability
to run society in their own interests through the soviets.
Every great revolution proceeds through downs as well as ups, through
detours in which people risk losing sight of the process as a whole. Russia in
1917 was no exception. The behaviour of the provisional government and the
generals led to an explosion of rage from the Petrograd workers and garrison
in July, and there were spontaneous moves to overthrow the provisional
government. But the Bolshevik leaders (including Trotsky, who had just joined
the party) rightly calculated that a seizure of power in Petrograd would gain
little support elsewhere at this point, and that the forces of reaction would use
this as an excuse to isolate and then destroy the revolutionary movement in the
city. They had, somehow, to restrain the movement while showing clear
solidarity with it.
The outcome did not immediately seem positive. Bolshevik restraint of the
movement led to a certain demoralisation among the revolutionary workers and
soldiers, while Bolshevik solidarity with it led the provisional government to
arrest many leaders and force others, notably Lenin, into hiding. By clamping
down on the movement, the provisional government opened the door to forces
which wanted to destroy every symbol of the revolution, including the
provisional government itself, and General Kornilov attempted to march on the
city. The final step towards the Bolshevik conquest of power for the soviet
system consisted, paradoxically, in organising the revolutionary defence of the
city against the attempted coup alongside supporters of the provisional
government—but in such a way as to undermine any last lingering respect for
that government.
Even then, the establishment of soviet power on 25 October was not a
foregone conclusion. It was clear that a majority of the all-Russian congress of
soviets which convened on that day would back the takeover of power. But
leading Bolsheviks such as Zinoviev and Kamenev were opposed, arguing
instead for discussions with the Menshevik and Social Revolutionary leaders.
By contrast, Lenin and Trotsky were convinced it would be fatal to delay. The
mass of people had gained confidence that they could change things,
overcoming habits of deference and obedience inculcated by thousands of
years of class rule. For the party to delay any further would be to declare it did
not share that confidence and, in the process, help destroy it. The economic
crisis was deepening by the day, and threatening to transform hope into
demoralisation and despair. If this was allowed to happen, the peasants,
soldiers and some workers might be attracted to the banner of a military
adventurer.
October 1917
The October Revolution in Petrograd was very different in one respect from
the February Revolution in the same city—it was much more peaceful. There
was less shooting and less chaos. This has led some right wing historians to
describe it as a ‘coup’, a minority action carried through by the Bolshevik
leaders over the heads of the masses. In fact it was orderly and peaceful
precisely because it was not a coup. It was not an action taken by a few figures
from above, but by the mass of people organised through structures which
expressed their own deepest aspirations. The Bolshevik-led Military
Revolutionary Committee of the Petrograd soviet could take decisions which
masses of workers and soldiers would obey, because it was part of a soviet
which they had elected and whose members they could replace. This gave it an
authority the provisional government lacked, and led all but a handful of troops
in the city to follow its commands, leaving Kerensky and his ministers little
choice but to flee.
‘The provisional government has ceased to exist,’ Trotsky reported to the
soviet on 25 October:
We were told that the insurrection would provoke a pogrom and drown the
revolution in torrents of blood. So far everything has gone off bloodlessly. We
don’t know of a single casualty. I don’t know of any examples in history of a
revolutionary movement in which such enormous masses participated and
which took place so bloodlessly.74
Soon afterwards, Lenin re-emerged from three months in hiding to say:
Now begins a new era in the history of Russia…One of our routine tasks is to
end the war at once. But in order to end the war…our capitalism itself must be
conquered. In this task we will be helped by the worldwide working class
movement which has already begun to develop in Italy, Germany and
England…We have the strength of a mass organisation which will triumph over
everything and bring the proletariat to the world revolution. In Russia we must
proceed at once to the construction of a proletarian socialist state. Long live
the worldwide socialist revolution.75
What had happened was momentous. In 1792-93 the working masses of
Paris had pushed the most radical section of the middle class into power, only
to see that power turned against themselves and then its holders ousted by self
seeking conservatives. In 1848 the children of those masses had forced a
couple of their own representatives into the government in February, only to be
butchered on the barricades in June. In 1871 they had gone further and briefly
taken power—but only in one city and only for two months. Now a congress of
workers, soldiers and peasants had taken state power in a country of 160
million, stretching from the Pacific coast to the Baltic. World socialism did
indeed seem on the agenda.
The revolution besieged
The leaders of the revolution were only too aware that they faced immense
problems so long as the revolution remained confined to the lands of the old
Russian Empire. The revolution had been successful because the working class
of Petrograd and a few other cities was concentrated in some of the biggest
factories in the world, right at the centres of administration and
communication. But it was, nevertheless, a small minority of the population.
The mass of peasants supported the revolution not because they were
socialists, but because it offered the same gains as a classic bourgeois
revolution—the division of land. The economic crisis produced by the war
was already crippling industry and causing hunger in the cities. The bread
ration was down to 300 grams, and the average daily energy intake for the
masses was just 1,500 calories.76 Reorganising industrial production to turn
out the goods which could persuade the peasants to provide the towns with
food was the Herculean task facing the committees of workers overseeing the
managers of every factory. It could hardly be achieved unless the revolution
received assistance from other revolutions in more industrially advanced
countries.
It was the belief that the war would give rise to such revolutions that had
persuaded Lenin to abandon his old contention that the revolution in Russia
could only be a bourgeois revolution. In 1906 he had denounced:
The absurd and semi-anarchist idea of…the conquest of power for a socialist
revolution. The degree of Russia’s economic development and the organisation
of the broad mass of the proletariat make the immediate and complete
emancipation of the working class impossible…Whoever tries to reach
socialism by any other path than that of political democracy will inevitably
arrive at conclusions that are absurd and reactionary.77
He had changed his mind because the war which had driven all of Russia
to revolt was having the same impact elsewhere in Europe. But, as Lenin
insisted in January 1918, ‘Without the German Revolution we are ruined’.78
The belief in international revolution was not a fantasy. The war had already
led to upsurges of revolt similar to those in Russia, if on a considerably
smaller scale—the mutinies of 1917 in the armies of France and Britain and in
the German navy, a strike by 200,000 German metal workers against a cut in
the bread ration, five days of fighting between workers and soldiers in Turin in
August 1917,79 illegal engineering and mining strikes in Britain, and a
republican rising in Dublin during Easter 1916.
Opposition to the war was now widespread across the continent. In
Germany the pro-war SPD had expelled a large proportion of its own
parliamentary party for expressing peace sentiments—leading them to form a
party of their own, the Independent Social Democrats. In Britain the future
Labour Party leader Ramsay MacDonald chaired a convention in Leeds of
workers’ delegates wanting peace.
But revolutions do not occur according to synchronised timetables. The
general pressures of a system in crisis produce similar eruptions of bitterness
in different places. However, the exact forms these take and their timing
depend upon local circumstances and traditions. Russia’s backward peasant
economy and its archaic state structure led its giant empire to crack in 1917,
before the states of western and central Europe. They had already been at least
partially modernised and industrialised as a result of the chain of revolutions
from 1649 to 1848. They all possessed, to varying degrees, something lacking
in Russia—established parliamentary socialist parties and trade union
bureaucracies enmeshed in the structures of existing society but retaining
credibility with wide layers of workers.
In January 1918 a wave of strikes swept through Austria-Hungary and
Germany, involving half a million metal workers in Vienna and Berlin. The
strikers were to a considerable degree inspired by the Russian Revolution, and
they were subject to vicious police attacks. Yet the Berlin workers still had
enough illusions in the pro-war SPD leaders Ebert and Scheidemann to give
them places on the strike committee. They used their influence to undermine the
strike and ensure its defeat, with massive levels of victimisation.
Rosa Luxemburg, in prison in Breslau, had foreseen the dangers facing
Russia in a letter to Karl Kautsky’s wife, Luise, on 24 November:
Are you happy about the Russians? Of course they will not be able to maintain
themselves in this witches’ sabbath, not because statistics show economic
development in Russia to be too backward, as your clever husband has figured
out, but because social democracy in the highly developed West consists of
miserable and wretched cowards who will look quietly on and let the Russians
bleed to death.80
The behaviour of the SPD in January confirmed her warnings. The German
high command had given the revolutionary government an ultimatum in
negotiations at the Polish border town of Brest-Litovsk. If it did not allow
Germany to take over vast areas of the Russian Ukraine, then the German army
would advance right into Russia. The revolutionary government appealed over
the head of the generals to Germany’s workers and soldiers, distributing
hundreds of thousands of leaflets in German across the front line. But the defeat
of the strike movement ruled out any chance of an immediate revolutionary
break-up of the German army, and its troops advanced hundreds of miles.
There were bitter arguments throughout the Bolshevik Party and the soviets as
to what to do. Both Bukharin and the Left Social Revolutionaries argued for
revolutionary war against Germany. Lenin argued for accepting the ultimatum
since the Bolsheviks had no forces with which to fight a revolutionary war.
Trotsky argued against both revolutionary war and accepting the ultimatum in
the hope that events in Germany would resolve the dilemma. In the end Lenin
persuaded most other Bolsheviks that accepting the ultimatum was the only
realistic option. The Left Social Revolutionaries resigned from the
government, leaving the Bolsheviks to govern alone.
The punitive terms imposed by Germany in return for peace rounded off
the damage done to the Russian economy by the war. The Ukraine contained the
bulk of Russia’s coal, and was the source of much of its grain. Industrial
production collapsed through lack of fuel, and the food shortages in the cities
grew even worse than before. In Petrograd the bread ration was cut to 150
grams on 27 January, and a mere 50 grams (less than two ounces) on 28
February. The impact on the working class of Petrograd who had made the
revolution was devastating. By April the factory workforce of the city was 40
percent of its level in January 1917. The big metal factories, which had been
the backbone of the workers’ movement since 1905, suffered most. In the first
six months of 1918 over a million people migrated from the city in the hope of
finding food elsewhere: ‘Within a matter of months, the proletariat of Red
Petrograd, renowned throughout Russia for its outstanding role in the
revolution, had been decimated’.81
The workers who had been able to lead the rest of Russia into revolution
because of their strategic role in the process of production no longer occupied
that role. The institutions they had thrown up—the soviets—still existed, but
had lost their organic ties to the workplaces.
The enthusiasm for the revolution persisted, leading to an influx of eager
workers, soldiers and peasants into the Bolshevik Party, where the ideals of
working class socialism inspired heroic deeds. This enthusiasm enabled
Trotsky to conjure up a new millions-strong Red Army, building round the
solid committed core provided by the workers’ militias of 1917. But the
soviets, the party and the Red Army were no longer part of a living, labouring
working class. Rather they were something akin to an updated version of
Jacobinism—although where the 1790s version had been driven by the ideals
of the radical wing of the bourgeoisie, the new version was motivated by the
ideals of working class socialism and world revolution.
The task of fighting for these ideals became more difficult as 1918
progressed. The German seizure of the Ukraine was followed in June and July
by attacks orchestrated by the British and French governments. Some 30,000
Czechoslovak troops (prisoners from the Austro-Hungarian army who had
been organised by Czech nationalists to fight on the Anglo-French-Russian
side) seized control of towns along the Trans-Siberian Railway, cutting Russia
in half. Under their protection Right Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
formed a government in Saratov which massacred anyone suspected of being a
Bolshevik in the street.82 Japanese forces seized control of Vladivostok on the
Pacific coast. British troops landed in Murmansk in the north, and also took
control of Baku in the south. In the same months, the Left Social
Revolutionaries assassinated the German ambassador in Petrograd in an effort
to destroy the peace of Brest-Litovsk and seize power by force, while Right
Social Revolutionaries assassinated the Bolshevik orator Volodarsky and
wounded Lenin.
External encirclement on the one hand and internal attempts at terrorism
and counter-revolution on the other brought a shift in the character of the
revolutionary regime. Victor Serge, an anarchist turned Bolshevik, described
the change in his Year One of the Russian Revolution, written in 1928. Until
June, he wrote:
The republic has a whole system of internal democracy. The dictatorship of the
proletariat is not yet the dictatorship of a party or of a central committee or of
certain individuals. Its mechanism is complex. Each soviet, each revolutionary
committee, each committee of the Bolshevik Party or the Left Social
Revolutionary Party holds a portion of it, and operates it after its own
fashion…All the decrees are debated during sessions [of the all-Russian soviet
executive] which are often of tremendous interest. Here the enemies of the
regime enjoy free speech with more than parliamentary latitude.83
Now all this began to change:
The Allied intervention, striking simultaneously with the rebellion of the
kulaks [rich peasants] and the collapse of the soviet alliance with the Left
Social Revolutionaries], poses an unmistakable threat to the survival of the
republic. The proletarian dictatorship is forced to throw off its democratic
paraphernalia forthwith. Famine and local anarchy compel a rigorous
concentration of powers in the hands of the appropriate commissariats…
Conspiracy compels the introduction of a powerful apparatus of internal
defence. Assassinations, peasant risings and mortal danger compel the use of
terror. The outlawing of the socialists of counter-revolution and the split with
the anarchists and Left Social Revolutionaries have as their consequence the
political monopoly of the Communist Party…Soviet institutions, beginning
with the local soviets and ending with the Vee-Tsik [all-Russian executive] and
the council of people’s commissars now function in a vacuum.84
It was at this point that the revolutionary government turned, for the first
time, to the systematic use of terror. The ‘White’ counter-revolutionaries had
shown their willingness to shoot suspected revolutionaries out of hand. They
had done so in October, as they fought to cling on to Moscow, and Whites in
Finland had killed 23,000 ‘Reds’ after putting down a Social Democrat rising
in January.85 Now the revolutionaries felt they had no choice but to respond in
kind. The shooting of suspected counter-revolutionaries, the taking of
bourgeois hostages, the adoption of methods designed to strike fear into the
heart of every opponent of the revolution now became an accepted part of
revolutionary activity. Yet despite the impression created by works such as
Solzhenitsyn’s Gulag Archipelago, the terror was very different from that
employed by Stalin from 1929 onwards. It was a reaction to real, not
imaginary, actions of counter-revolution and it ended in 1921 once the civil
war was over.
The revolutionary regime held out against all odds because it was able,
despite terrible hardship, to draw support from the poorer classes right across
the old Russian Empire. It alone offered any hope to the workers, guaranteed
land to the poorer peasants, resisted the anti-Semitic gangs working with the
White armies, and had no fear of self determination for the non-Russian
nationalities.
Yet all the time those who led the revolutionary regime—and the hundreds
of thousands of volunteers who risked their lives to carry its message—looked
west, to the industrialised countries of Europe, in the hope of desperately
needed relief.
Chapter 3
Europe in turmoil
The German November
The revolutionary upsurge in the West was not long coming in historical terms.
It followed just 12 months after the Russian October—although these were
very long months for starving, war-torn Russia.
The extortionate terms the German Empire imposed at Brest-Litovsk
provided its rulers with a breathing space, but only a brief one. A great and
bloody offensive in March 1918 took its armies further into France than at any
time since 1914 but then ground to a halt. A second attempt to push forward in
August failed, and then it was the German army’s turn to retreat. It was running
out of reserves of manpower, while US entry into the war the year before had
provided the Anglo-French side with fresh troops and access to vast supplies
of equipment. The German high command panicked, and Ludendorff suffered
some sort of nervous breakdown.86 In late September he decided that there had
to be an immediate armistice and sought to avoid responsibility for this by
persuading the Kaiser to appoint a new government containing a couple of
Social Democrat ministers. But it was not possible simply to switch off the
war which had convulsed all of Europe for four years. The rival imperialisms,
particularly that of France, wanted a pound of flesh similar to that which
German imperialism had demanded of Russia earlier in the year. For a month
the German government tried desperately to avoid paying such a price and the
war continued, as bloody as ever. British, French and US troops pushed into
German-held territory in France and Belgium. In the Balkans a combined
British, French, Serbian, Greek and Italian force routed the Austrian army.
The pressure was too much for the rickety multinational Austro-Hungarian
monarchy, heir to the Holy Roman Empire born 1,200 years before. Its army
collapsed and the middle class leaders of the national minorities seized control
of the major cities: Czechs and Slovaks took over Prague, Brno and Bratislava;
supporters of a unified ‘Yugoslav’ south Slav state took over Zagreb and
Sarajevo; Hungarians under the liberal aristocrat Michael Karoly held
Budapest; and Poles took Cracow. As huge crowds stormed through the streets
of Vienna, demanding a republic and tearing down imperial emblems,87 power
in the German-speaking part of Austria passed into the hands of a Social
Democrat led coalition with the bourgeois parties.
Germany’s own high command, desperate to rescue something from the
debacle, ordered its fleet to sail against Britain in the hope of a sudden,
redeeming, naval victory. But its sailors were not prepared to accept certain
death. Their mutiny the year before had been crushed and its leaders executed
because it had been too passive—they had simply gone on strike, allowing the
officers and military police to hit back at them. This time they did not make the
same mistake. Sailors in Kiel armed themselves, marched through the town
alongside striking dockers, disarmed their opponents and established a
soldiers’ council. They lit a fuse for the whole of Germany.
Huge demonstrations of workers and soldiers took control of Bremen,
Hamburg, Hanover, Cologne, Leipzig, Dresden and scores of other towns. In
Munich they took over the royal palace and proclaimed an anti-war reformist
socialist, Kurt Eisner, prime minister of a ‘Bavarian Free State’. On 9
November it was Berlin’s turn. As vast processions of workers and soldiers
with guns and red flags swarmed through the capital, the recently released anti-
war revolutionary Karl Liebknecht proclaimed a ‘socialist republic’ and the
‘world revolution’ from the balcony of the imperial palace. Not to be outdone,
the pro-war SPD minister in the Kaiser’s last government, Scheidemann,
proclaimed a ‘republic’ from the balcony of the imperial parliament. The
Kaiser fled to Holland, and the two Social Democrat parties presented a
‘revolutionary government’ of ‘people’s commissars’ for endorsement by an
assembly of 1,500 workers’ and soldiers’ delegates. It symbolised the fact that
soldiers’ and workers’ councils were now the arbiters of political power
everywhere in Germany, and in German-occupied Belgium. The forces of
revolution embodied in such councils, or soviets, seemed to be sweeping
across the whole of northern Eurasia, from the North Sea to the North Pacific.
But the German councils had given revolutionary power to men determined
not to use it for revolutionary ends. Ebert, the new prime minister, was on the
phone to General Groener of the military high command within 24 hours. The
pair agreed to work together—with the support of Hindenburg, the wartime
‘dictator’—to restore order in the army so that the army could restore order in
society as a whole.88
Social Democrat politicians who had stood for reform via the capitalist
state had logically supported that state when it came to war in 1914. Now, just
as logically, they tried to re-establish the power of that state in the face of
revolution. For them the old structures of repression and class power were
‘order’ the challenge to those structures from the exploited and dispossessed
represented ‘anarchy’ and ‘chaos’.
The living embodiments of this challenge were the best-known opponents
of the war—Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht. Liebknecht in particular
had massive support among the soldiers and workers of Berlin. The Social
Democrat leaders manoeuvred with the military high command to destroy this.
They provoked a rising in the city in order to crush it with troops from outside,
blaming the bloodshed on Liebknecht and Luxemburg. The pair were seized by
army officers. Liebknecht was knocked unconscious and then shot.
Luxemburg’s skull was smashed by a rifle butt, she was shot in the head and
then thrown in a canal. The Social Democrat press reported that Liebknecht
had been shot ‘while trying to escape’ and that Luxemburg had been killed ‘by
an angry crowd’. When respectable members of the middle class read the
news, they ‘jumped for joy’.89 Nothing had changed since the days of the
Gracchus brothers and Spartacus in the attitude of the ‘civilised’ rich towards
those who resisted their rule.
However, subduing the revolutionary ferment was not an easy task for the
alliance between the Social Democrats and the military. Historians have often
given the impression that the German Revolution was a minor event, ended
easily and rapidly. This is even the message conveyed by Eric Hobsbawm’s
often stimulating history of the 20th century, The Age of Extremes. He writes
that after a few days in November ‘the republicanised old regime was no
longer seriously troubled by the socialists…[and] even less by the newly
improvised Communist Party’.90 In fact the first great wave of revolutionary
ferment was not brought to an end until the summer of 1920, and there was a
second wave in 1923.
As with every great revolution in history, that of November 1918 led to
vast numbers of people becoming interested in politics for the first time. Talk
of revolution and socialism was no longer confined to the core of workers who
had voted socialist before 1914. It spread to millions of workers and lower
middle class people who had previously voted for the Catholic Centre Party,
the liberal Progressives, the illiberal ‘National Liberals’, or even the agrarian
party run by the Prussian landowners. In the course of the war many of the old
Social Democrat workers had begun to identify with the left wing opponents of
the pro-war leaders—around half the members of the old SPD went over to the
left wing Independent Social Democrats. But for every one of these, there were
many other people who had moved to the left from the bourgeois parties and
still saw the Social Democrat leaders as socialists. Where in the past they had
opposed the Social Democrats for this, now they supported them.
The Social Democrat leaders played on these feelings, continuing to make
left wing speeches but insisting that left wing policies could only be introduced
gradually, by maintaining order and resisting revolutionary ‘excesses’. They
claimed it was Luxemburg and Liebknecht who endangered the revolution,
while secretly arranging with the generals to shoot down those who disagreed.
They were helped in putting across this message by the leaders of the
Independent Social Democrats. These had not been happy about the war, but
most remained committed to reforming capitalism. Their ranks included
Kautsky, Bernstein, and Hilferding—who would be economics minister in two
coalition governments with the bourgeois parties in the next decade. For the
crucial first two months of the revolution the party served loyally in a
government led by the majority SPD and helped sell its policies to the mass of
workers and soldiers.
But, as the weeks passed, people who had been enthusiastic supporters of
the Social Democrat leaders began to turn against them. Troops, sent to Berlin
to help the government assert control in November, rose against it in the first
week of January, and many of the workers and soldiers who helped suppress
the January rising were themselves in revolt in the capital by March. Elections
in mid-January gave the SPD 11.5 million votes and the Independent Social
Democrats 2.3 million. Yet in the next few weeks workers who had voted
solidly for the Social Democrats in the Ruhr, central Germany, Bremen,
Hamburg, Berlin and Munich went on general strike and took up arms against
the policies of the government. By June 1920 the SPD vote was only 600,000
higher than that of the Independent Social Democrats.
The Social Democrat leaders rapidly discovered that they could not rely
simply on their own popularity to ‘restore order’. Late in December 1918 the
Social Democrat minister of the interior, Noske, boasted that ‘someone has to
be the bloodhound’, and agreed with the generals to set up a special mercenary
force, the Freikorps. Drawn from the officers and ‘storm battalions’ of the old
army, it was thoroughly reactionary. ‘It was as if the old order rose again,’
observed the conservative historian Meinecke. The language of the Freikorps
was vehemently nationalistic and often anti-Semitic. It banners were often
adorned with an ancient Hindu symbol for good luck, the swastika, and many
of its members went on to form the cadres of the Nazi Party.
The history of Germany in the first half of 1919 is the history of the march
of the Freikorps through the country attacking the very people who had made
the November Revolution and voted Social Democrat in the January election.
It met repeated armed resistance, culminating in the proclamation in April of a
short-lived Bavarian Soviet Republic with its own Red Army of 15,000.
‘The spirit of revolution’
The months of civil war in Germany were also months of unrest throughout
much of the rest of Europe. The British prime minister Lloyd George wrote to
his French equivalent, Clemenceau, in March:
The whole of Europe is filled with the spirit of revolution…The whole
existing order in its political, social and economic aspects is questioned by the
mass of the population from one end of Europe to the other.91
The US representative in Paris, House, expressed similar fears in his
diary: ‘Bolshevism is gaining ground everywhere…We are sitting upon an
open powder magazine and some day a spark may ignite it’.92
The immediate cause for their concern was the taking of power by a soviet
regime in Hungary, led by Bela Kun, a former Hungarian prisoner of war in
Russia. The liberal nationalist regime established at the end of 1918 had
collapsed, unable to prevent Czechoslovakia and Romania seizing parts of the
country, and a Communist-Social Democrat government had taken power
peacefully. It pushed through domestic reforms and nationalisation, and
attempted to wage revolutionary war against Czechoslovakia and Romania,
hoping for support from the Russian Red Army to its east and an uprising of
Austrian workers to its west.
Nowhere else did revolutionary governments come to power, but nowhere
was the situation stable, either. The newly formed nationalist republics of
central and eastern Europe all contained ethnic minorities who resented the
new order. In Czechoslovakia, German speakers were in the majority in some
sizeable regions and Hungarian speakers in others. Romania and Yugoslavia
contained large Hungarian speaking minorities. Yugoslavia and Austria had
bitter border disputes with Italy, and Bulgaria with Romania. There was
continual fighting between Polish and German forces in Silesia, and all out
war erupted between Turkey and Greece, with large-scale ethnic cleansing on
both sides. Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria contained large numbers of workers
with revolutionary sentiments opposed to the middle class nationalism of their
governments.
Revolutionaries led unemployed workers in an attempt to storm the
Austrian parliament in April 1919. For a moment it was not absurd to conceive
of the revolution in Hungary linking with Russia to the east and, through
Austria, with soviet Bavaria to the west, overturning the entire setup in the
former German and Austro-Hungarian empires.
It was not to be. The Austrian Social Democrats used a language somewhat
to the left of those in Germany, but they were just as adamantly opposed to
further revolution. They persuaded the Viennese workers’ councils to allow the
protests to be crushed, ensuring the survival of Austrian capitalism.
Meanwhile, the Communist-Social Democrat government in Budapest did not
form real workers’ councils. It relied on the old officers to run its army, and
made the fundamental mistake of alienating the peasantry by failing to divide
up the great estates which dominated the countryside. The regime collapsed
after 133 days when the Social Democrats abandoned it, opening the door to a
right wing dictatorship under Admiral Horthy.
The ferment in 1919 was not confined to the defeated empires. It affected
the victors too, even if not usually to the same degree. The British and French
armies were shaken by mutinies among troops forced to wait before returning
home. The armies sent against the Russian Revolution were not immune to the
unrest—British, French and US troops in Archangel refused to go into battle,
while French forces had to be evacuated from Odessa and other Black Sea
ports after staging a mutiny.93
At the same time there was a rising wave of industrial unrest in Britain
itself. Engineering strikes at the beginning of the year led to bitter clashes with
the police in Glasgow and to a near general strike, uniting Catholics and
Protestants, in Belfast. There were police strikes in Liverpool and London.
The government narrowly averted a miners’ strike by making promises it later
broke, but it could not avoid a nine day shutdown of the railway network. The
formation of a ‘triple alliance’ between the mining, transport and railway
unions in January 1920 terrified the government. ‘The ministers…seem to have
got the wind up to a most extraordinary extent,’ wrote the head of the cabinet
secretariat.94
Spain had not taken part in the war because its rulers were split between
the pro-German sentiments of the court and the pro-Anglo-French sentiments of
the bourgeoisie (and the Socialist Party of Pablo Iglesias). But rising prices
had devastated the living standards of its industrial and agricultural workers.
There had been a widespread but unsuccessful general strike in the summer of
1917, and a new wave of militancy erupted as 1918 progressed.
The years 1918-20 were known as the Trienio Bolchevista (‘the Bolshevik
three years’) in southern Spain, with its vast estates manned by seasonally
employed day-labourers. There was ‘a rising wave of organisational activity,
strikes, confrontations and meetings’,95 encouraged by news that the
Bolsheviks in Russia were dividing estates up among the poorer peasants.
‘Here, as everywhere else,’ wrote the American novelist Dos Passos, ‘Russia
has been the beacon fire’.96 Three great strikes swept the area, with labourers
occupying the land, burning down the houses of absentee landlords and
sometimes setting fire to the fields. ‘Bolshevik-type republics’ were
proclaimed in some towns, and it took the dispatch of 20,000 troops to break
the momentum of the movement.97 The agitation was not confined to the south.
During a week long strike in Valencia workers renamed various streets
‘Lenin’, ‘Soviets’ and ‘October Revolution’, and widespread bread riots in
Madrid led to the looting of 200 shops.98 The most serious struggle was in
Catalonia early in 1919. Workers struck and occupied the La Canadiense plant,
which supplied most of Barcelona’s power, paralysing public transport and
plunging the city into darkness. Some 70 percent of the city’s textile plants
went on strike, as did the gas and water workers, while the printers’ union
exercised a ‘red censorship’. The government imposed a state of emergency
and interned 3,000 strikers. But this did not stop what seemed like a
capitulation by the employers. There was a short-lived return to work until the
government provoked a new strike by refusing to free some imprisoned
strikers. It brought troops with machine-guns into the city, armed 8,000
bourgeois volunteers, closed down the unions and crushed a general strike
within a fortnight. The back of the workers’ movement in Catalonia was
eventually broken as gunmen in the pay of the employers shot down union
activists. Anarchist CNT members like Garcia Oliver, Francisco Ascaso and
Buenaventura Durutti retaliated by assassinating ruling class figures. Their
activities only served to further fragment the workers’ forces. But a deep-
seated class hatred remained within the Catalan working class, to explode at
intervals over the next 17 years.99
The rising tide of workers’ struggle in 1919 was not confined to Europe.
The US witnessed the biggest attempt yet to unionise its unorganised industries,
with a bitter strike of 250,000 steel workers. Australia exploded in ‘the most
costly series of strikes yet known…in 1919, some 6.3 million days were lost
in industrial disputes’.100 Winnipeg in Canada experienced a general strike as
part of a wave of agitation across western Canada and the north west coast of
the US.
The revolutionary upheavals in Western Europe peaked in 1920 with
decisive struggles in Germany and Italy.
The series of regional civil wars in Germany inflicted massive casualties
on workers as they moved from a parliamentary to a revolutionary perspective
—the usual estimate of the number of dead is 20,000. But the country’s
traditional rulers were still not happy, and many now felt strong enough to
dispense with the Social Democrats and take power themselves. On 13 March
troops marched into Berlin, declared the government overthrown and
appointed a senior civil servant, Kapp, in its place.
The thugs armed by the Social Democrat leaders had moved from attacking
the left to attacking those same leaders. It was a step too far, and produced a
bitter reaction among rank and file workers who had accepted the Social
Democrats’ past excuses for working with the generals. The head of the main
trade union federation, Legien, called for a general strike, and across Germany
workers responded.
In key areas, however, the response was not just to stop work. People also
formed new workers’ councils, took up arms and attacked columns of troops
known to be sympathetic to the coup. In the Ruhr thousands of workers, many
with military experience, flocked to form a Red Army which drove the national
army, the Reichswehr, from the country’s biggest industrial region. Within days
the coup had collapsed. The Social Democrat ministers returned to Berlin and
made a few left wing noises before throwing in their lot once more with the
Reichswehr as it used its normal bloody methods to restore ‘order’ in the
Ruhr.101
In Italy 1919 and 1920 were known as ‘the two red years’. Workers started
a wave of strikes and flocked into the Socialist Party, which raised its
membership from 50,000 to 200,000, and into the unions. Strike wave
followed strike wave. The summer of 1919 saw a three day general strike in
solidarity with revolutionary Russia. In the spring of 1920 Turin metal workers
waged a bitter but unsuccessful strike aimed at making the employers recognise
factory councils—which were viewed by revolutionaries around Antonio
Gramsci’s journal Ordine Nuovo as the beginning of soviets.
The militancy reached a climax in August. Engineering workers in Milan
reacted to a lockout by occupying the factories. Within four days the movement
had spread throughout the country’s entire metal working industry and involved
400,000 workers: ‘Wherever there was a factory, a dockyard, a steelworks, a
forge, a foundry in which metallos worked, there was a new occupation’.102
An estimated 100,000 workers in other industries followed the metal workers’
example. People no longer regarded this as a simple economic struggle. They
began to make and store weapons in the factories. They kept production going
because they believed they were inaugurating a new society based on workers’
control: ‘These hundreds of thousands of workers, with arms or without, who
worked and slept and kept watch in the factories, thought the extraordinary
days they were living through “the revolution in action”.’103
The government was paralysed. In the south, peasants returning from the
war had begun to spontaneously divide the land. Soldiers in Ancona had
mutinied to avoid being sent to fight in Albania. The prime minister, Giolitti,
feared unleashing a civil war which he could not win. He told the Senate:
To prevent the occupations I would have to put a garrison in each of…600
factories in the metallurgical industry…100 men in the small, several thousand
in the large. To occupy the factories I would have to deploy all the forces at my
disposal! And who would exercise surveillance over the 500,000 workers
outside the factories? It would have been civil war.104
Instead he operated on the assumption the metal workers’ union leaders
would concede a peaceful outcome to the dispute and the Socialist Party
leaders would not challenge the union leaders’ decision. This would leave the
employers free to fight another day. He was proved right. The Socialist Party
formally decided the occupations were the responsibility of the union
leadership, and a special convention of the main union federation then decided
by three votes to two to reject calls for revolution and reach an agreement with
the employers. The core of the movement, the metal workers in the major
factories, felt demoralised and defeated. They had fought for a revolution and
all they had got were a few minor and temporary improvements in wages and
conditions.
Revolution in the West?
The Ruhr Red Army and the Italian occupations of the factories give the lie to
the argument that there was never any possibility of revolution in Western
Europe—that it was all a fantasy in the minds of Russia’s Bolsheviks. In the
spring and summer of 1920 very large numbers of workers, who had been
brought up in capitalist society and taken it for granted, embarked upon
struggles, and in doing so turned to a revolutionary socialist view of how
society should be run. World revolution was not a fantasy in August 1920, with
the Russian Red Army approaching Warsaw, the memory of the defeat of the
‘Kapp Putsch’ in the mind of every German worker and the Italian factories on
the verge of occupation.
It did not happen, and historians of socialism have been discussing ever
since why the revolution in Russia was not repeated. Part of the reason clearly
has to do with objective differences between Russia and the West. In most
Western countries capitalism had grown up over a longer historical period than
in Russia, with more chance to develop social structures which integrated
people into its rule. In most Western countries, unlike Russia, the peasantry had
either been granted land (as in southern Germany or France) or obliterated as a
class (as in Britain), and therefore was not a force with the potential to
challenge the old order. Most Western states were also more efficient than the
aged ramshackle state apparatus of tsarism, and so had managed to survive the
trauma of the war better.
But such objective factors cannot explain everything. As we have seen,
millions of workers in the West did move towards revolutionary actions and
attitudes, even if this happened a couple of years after the same shift in Russia.
But moving to a revolutionary attitude, or even engaging in revolutionary
action, is not the same as making a revolution. That requires more than a desire
for change. It requires a body of people with the will and understanding to turn
that desire into reality—the will and understanding provided in the great
bourgeois revolutions by Cromwell’s New Model Army or Robespierre’s
Jacobins. Such bodies simply did not exist in Germany and Italy in the vital
months of 1920.
The socialist movements in Europe had generally grown up during the
years of relative social tranquility between 1871 and the early 1900s. They
had gained support because of the bitterness people felt at the class divisions
in society, but it was mainly passive support. They had built a whole set of
institutions—trade unions, welfare societies, cooperatives, workers’ clubs—
opposed in principle to existing society, but in practice coexisting with it.
Through the running of these institutions they enjoyed a secure livelihood and
even, as elected representatives, a certain level of acceptance from the more
liberal members of the ruling class. They were in a position in some ways
analogous to that of late medieval merchants and burghers, who combined
resentment against the feudal lords with a tendency to ape their behaviour and
their ideas. Many of the feudal lower classes had tolerated such behaviour
because they took the existing hierarchies for granted. So too the rank and file
of the workers’ movement were often prepared to put up with their leaders’
behaviour.
The mass strikes of the years immediately before the war had given birth to
militant and revolutionary currents which challenged these attitudes, and the
war had produced further splits. There tended to be an overlap between
hostility to the prevailing reformism and hostility to the war, although
reformists like Bernstein and Kurt Eisner did dislike the war. By its end three
distinct currents had emerged.
First, there were the pro-war Social Democrats of the Ebert-Scheidemann-
Noske sort, for whom support for the war was an integral part of their
acceptance of capitalism. Second, there were the revolutionaries, who
opposed the war as the supreme barbaric expression of capitalism and who
saw revolution as the only way to end it once and for all. Third, there was a
very large amorphous group which became known as ‘the centre’ or ‘the
centrists’, epitomised by the Independent Social Democrats in Germany. Most
of its leaders accepted the theory and practice of pre-war socialism, and saw
their future essentially as operating as parliamentarians or trade unionists
within capitalism.
During the war the centrists called for existing governments to negotiate
peace, rather than for mass agitation that might disrupt the war effort. After the
war they sometimes used left wing terminology, but were always careful to
insist that socialist aims could only be achieved in an ‘orderly’ manner.
Typically, Hilferding of the Independent Social Democrats in Germany
attempted to frame constitutional proposals which combined soviets and
parliament. They repeatedly proposed plans for peaceful compromise that
stalled the upsurge of workers’ activity to the advantage of the other side. As
the revolutionary socialist Eugen Leviné told the court which sentenced him to
death for leading the Bavarian soviet, ‘The Social Democrats start, then run
away and betray us; the Independents fall for the bait, join us and then let us
down, and we Communists are then stood up against the wall. We Communists
are all dead men on leave’.105
Organisations of the centre typically grew very rapidly in the aftermath of
the war. They had well known parliamentary leaders and a large press, and
attracted very large numbers of bitter and militant workers. The German
Independent Social Democrats probably had ten times as many members as
Rosa Luxemburg’s Spartakus League in November 1918.
The Italian Socialist Party was the same sort of party as the German
Independent Social Democrats. The approach of its leaders to politics was
essentially parliamentarian, although they used revolutionary language and
some, at least, did want a transformation of society. It also contained openly
reformist elements—most notably a leading parliamentarian, Filippo Turati. It
grew massively as the tide of struggle rose but also failed to provide the sort
of leadership that would have channelled the anger and militancy of workers
into a revolutionary onslaught against the state. The best known leader of the
party, Serrati, admitted eight months after the occupation of the factories,
‘While everyone talked about revolution, no one prepared for it’.106 Pietro
Nenni, who was to be a dominant figure in the Socialist Party for another 60
years, admitted, ‘The party was nothing but a great electoral machine,
equipped only for the [parliamentary] struggle which, in theory, it
repudiated’.107 Angelo Tasca, a Turin activist, recalled, ‘The method of the
workers’ and socialist organisations…was alternatively to advise calm’ to ‘the
over-excited masses…and promise them revolution’.108 ‘Political life in Italy
became one long meeting at which the capital of the “coming revolution” was
squandered in an orgy of words’.109
The leaders of the Russian Revolution had seen the inadequacies of the
‘centre’ as well as the right wing parliamentary socialists, and had called for
the formation of new Communist parties in each country affiliated to a new
Communist International. But the repression and dislocation of the war years
meant the first conference of the International could not take place until March
1919, and even then representation from across Europe, let alone the rest of the
world, was sparse. The second congress, in July and August 1920, was the
first genuinely representative gathering.
The strength of revolutionary feeling among workers across Europe was
shown by the parties which sent delegations. The mainstream socialist parties
did so in Italy, France and Norway. The Independent Social Democrats from
Germany, the CNT from Spain, even the Independent Labour Party from Britain
and the Socialist Party from the US were present. One of the main messages of
the congress—laid down in the ‘21 conditions’ for membership of the
International—was that these parties could only become truly revolutionary if
they transformed their own ways of operating and their leaderships. In
particular they could not continue to contain members like Kautsky in Germany,
Turati in Italy and MacDonald in Britain.
The conditions caused enormous rows, with many of the middle of the road
leaders refusing to accept them. It was only after splits over the issue that the
majority of the German Independent Social Democrats and the French Socialist
Party, together with a minority in Italy, voted to become Communist parties ‘of
a new type’.
But the moves in this direction came too late to affect the great struggles in
Germany and Italy in 1920. A fresh crisis developed in Germany in 1923, with
French troops occupying the Ruhr, inflation soaring astronomically, the whole
country polarised between left and right, the first growth of Hitler’s Nazis, and
a successful general strike against the conservative Cuno government. Yet even
then the conservative parliamentary tradition of pre-war socialism still
showed its hold on even some of the most militant revolutionaries. The
Communist leaders formed parliamentary ‘workers’ governments’ with Social
Democrats in two states, Thuringia and Saxony, supposedly to use them as
launching pads for a revolutionary rising—but they then cancelled plans for the
rising, even though it appears the majority of the working class supported it.110
The reformist socialists who rejected revolution did so believing that once
the threat of revolution was removed life would continue as before, with the
peaceful expansion of capitalism and the spread of democracy. Events in Italy
showed how mistaken they were.
The bitter price: the first fascism
At the time of the occupation of the factories in 1920 Mussolini was a
nationally known figure in Italy—famous as the rabble-rousing Socialist editor
who had broken with his party to support the war. But his personal political
following was small, confined to a group of other ex-revolutionaries turned
national chauvinists, and a scattering of former frontline combatants who
believed Italy had been denied its right to territory in Austria and along the
Yugoslav coast. A few dozen of them had formed the first fascio de
combattimento (fascist fighting unit) in March 1919, but they had done very
poorly in the elections of that year and were stuck, impotent, on the sidelines
as Italy’s workers confronted the employers and the government.
The failure of the occupation of the factories to turn into a revolutionary
struggle for power transformed Mussolini’s fortunes. Workers became
demoralised as rising unemployment quickly took away the material gains of
‘the two red years’. The employers remained desperate to teach the workers’
movement a lesson it would not forget, and the ‘liberal’ prime minister Giolitti
wanted a counterweight against the left. Mussolini offered his services.
Sections of big business and, secretly, the Giolitti government provided him
with funds—the minister of war issued a circular advising 60,000 demobilised
officers that they would be paid 80 percent of their army wages if they joined
the fasci.111 Giolitti formed a ‘centre-right’ electoral pact which gave
Mussolini 35 parliamentary seats in March 1921. In return, Mussolini’s armed
groups began to systematically attack local centres of left wing and union
strength, beginning in the Po Valley, where labourers and sharecroppers had
been involved in bitter strikes against the landowners.
Groups of 50 or 60 fascists would arrive in villages and small towns in
lorries, burn down the Socialist ‘people’s house’ halls, break up picket lines,
punish militants by beating them and forcing castor oil down their throats, and
then roar off, knowing the police would give them plenty of time to get away.
The members of Socialist and trade union organisations, by and large people
tied to jobs and scattered in widely separate villages, could rarely respond
quickly enough to such attacks. The fascists could feel absolutely safe,
knowing the police would always arrange to turn up after they were gone and
were willing ‘to look on murder as a sport’.112
Success bred success for the fascists. They were able to mobilise
‘landowners, garrison officers, university students, officials, rentiers,
professional men and tradespeople’113 from the towns for their expeditions into
the countryside. The number of fascist squads grew from 190 in October 1920
to 1,000 in February 1921 and 2,300 in November of that year.114
Yet they were still not all-powerful. Giolitti’s government wanted to use
the fascists, not be used by them—and it still had the power to stop the fascists
in their tracks. When 11 soldiers opened fire on a group of 500 fascists in
Sarzana in July of 1921, the fascists ran away.115 At this time workers began to
throw up their own paramilitary groups, the arditi del popolo, prepared to take
on the fascists. One fascist leader, Banchelli, admitted the squads did not know
‘how to defend themselves’ when people fought back.116 There was a brief
crisis within the fascist movement, with Mussolini resigning from the fascist
executive because he was ‘depressed’.117
He was rescued by the attitude of the leaders of the workers’ movement.
Turati’s reformist socialists and the main CGL trade union federation signed a
peace treaty with the fascists. The allegedly more left wing leaders of the main
Socialist Party (which had finally broken with Turati) simply remained passive
and denounced the arditi del popolo. The Communist leader of the time,
Amadeo Bordiga, refused to see any difference between the fascists and other
bourgeois parties, abstained from the struggle and denounced the arditi del
popolo.
Mussolini was able to wait until the landowners and big business had
applied enough pressure to the government to make it change its attitude, then
break the truce and resume the attacks on the workers’ organisations at a time
of his own choosing. Now the attacks were not just in villages and country
towns, but on left wing premises, newspaper offices and union halls in the big
cities.
The official leaders of the workers’ movement finally tried to respond to
the attacks in 1922. They formed a ‘Labour Alliance’ of all the unions and
called a three day general strike in July after attacks on their premises in
Ravenna. But at a time of economic recession, with high levels of
unemployment, a three day strike hardly deterred sections of big business from
continuing to finance Mussolini—and since it was not accompanied by a
systematic mobilisation of workers’ groups to fight the fascists for control of
the streets, Mussolini remained as powerful after it as he was before.
The demoralisation following the failure of the strike allowed him to
extend his area of control into cities like Milan, Ancona and Genoa, even
though the possibility of successful resistance was demonstrated when the
arditi del popolo beat back the fascists in Parma.118 By October 1922
Mussolini was powerful enough to turn the tables on Giolitti and the bourgeois
liberals. When they offered him a place in their government he declared his
fascists would march on Rome if the government was not put under his control.
This was mere bluster on his part: if the state had wanted to stop him, it could
have done so easily. But the generals and big business did not want to stop
him. The king appointed him prime minister and, far from marching on Rome,
Mussolini arrived there by train from Milan.
The Italian bourgeoisie showed that it saw the preservation of privilege
and profit as more important than democratic principles when the Liberal Party
helped give Mussolini a parliamentary majority and took posts as ministers in
his first government.
It was not only the bourgeoisie who believed Mussolini would bring
‘order’ and stability to the country. As one history of Italian fascism recounts:
With the exception of the communists and nearly all the socialists, the whole of
parliament, including the democratic anti-fascists and the socialists of the
CGL, welcomed Mussolini’s government with a sigh of relief, as the end of a
nightmare. The civil war, people said, was over; fascism would, it was hoped,
at last behave legally.119
In fact the nightmare was only just beginning. With Mussolini in
government, the police and the fascists now acted in concert. Together they
were able to systematically dismantle working class organisations, leaving
liberal politicians and intellectuals with no counterweight to the threat of
fascist violence. For a time the trappings of democracy remained intact, with
even left Socialist and Communist deputies free to voice their opinions in
parliament, although not outside. But real power now lay with Mussolini, not
the constitutional institutions.
This was shown dramatically in 1924. Mussolini’s henchmen murdered a
leading reformist socialist parliamentarian, Matteotti. The fascists briefly lost
much of their previous support and according to some judgements ‘in the week
that followed the crime the government might easily have been toppled’.120 But
the parliamentary opposition restricted itself to marching out of the chamber in
protest to form its own breakaway ‘Aventine’ assembly. It was not prepared to
risk social upheaval by calling for mass action against the government, and
most deputies had tamely given in to the fascists and resumed their places in
parliament by the beginning of 1925.
Mussolini now knew he could get away with any atrocity, and transformed
Italy into a totalitarian regime with himself as the all-powerful Duce—leader.
Mussolini’s success drew admiration from ruling classes elsewhere in Europe.
The British Conservative Winston Churchill was happy to praise him,121 and
there were soon many imitators of his methods. Among them was a rising
figure among nationalist anti-Semitic circles in Munich—Adolf Hitler.
The bitter price: the seeds of Stalinism
The failure to spread the revolution left Russia isolated, and it had to suffer not
just a material blockade but all the horrors of foreign invasion by some 16
armies, civil war, devastation, disease and hunger. Industrial production sank
to a mere 18 percent of its 1916 figure, and the small rump of the working
class which remained in the cities could only feed itself by travelling to the
countryside to engage in individual barter with peasants. As typhus spread and
even cannibalism appeared, the Bolsheviks increasingly held on to power
through a party regime rather than as direct representatives of a virtually non-
existent working class. That they survived says an enormous amount about the
revolutionary courage and endurance of the workers who still made up the bulk
of the party. But that did not stop them having to pay a political price for
survival.
This was shown starkly in March 1921 when sailors in Kronstadt, the
naval fort outside Petrograd (St Petersburg), rose up, blaming the revolutionary
government for the incredible levels of poverty. Kronstadt had been one of the
great centres of Bolshevik strength in 1917, but its composition had changed as
old militants went to fight in the Red Army and were replaced by men fresh
from the countryside. The rising could not present any programme for
overcoming poverty, since this was not a capitalist crisis caused by the
existence of wealth alongside poverty but rather the product of a whole country
impoverished by civil war, foreign invasion and blockade. There was not one
class living in affluence and another in starvation, but simply different degrees
of hunger. The generals of the old regime, only finally defeated in civil war a
few months before, were waiting for any chance to stage a comeback, and a
few eventually established friendly relations with some of the Kronstadt
rebels. Time was not on the revolutionary government’s side. The ice
surrounding the fortress was melting and it would soon become difficult to
recapture.122 All these factors gave the Bolsheviks little choice but to put down
the rising—a fact recognised by the ‘workers’ opposition’ inside the Bolshevik
Party, who were in the forefront of those to cross the ice to take on the sailors.
Yet Kronstadt was a sign of the wretched conditions to which isolation and
foreign intervention had reduced the revolution. It could only survive by
methods which owed more to Jacobinism than to the Bolshevism of 1917.
These methods necessarily had their effect on members of the Bolshevik
Party. The years of civil war inculcated many with an authoritarian approach
which fitted poorly with talk of workers’ democracy. Lenin recognised as much
when in inner party debates in the winter of 1920-21 he argued, ‘Ours is a
workers’ state with bureaucratic distortions’.123 He described the state
apparatus as ‘borrowed from tsarism and hardly touched by the soviet world…
a bourgeois and tsarist mechanism’.124 This was affecting the attitude of many
party members: ‘Let us look at Moscow. This mass of bureaucrats—who is
leading whom? The 4,700 responsible Communists the mass of bureaucrats, or
the other way round?’125
The third congress of the Communist International met in the summer of
1921. It was the first to draw together more or less wholly revolutionary
delegates. Many were ecstatic to be in the land of the revolution. But although
the language of the revolution survived and many Bolsheviks remained
committed to its ideals, the party as whole could not remain immune to the
effects of isolation, authoritarianism and reliance on the old bureaucracy. Marx
had written in 1851 that ‘human beings make history’, but not ‘under conditions
of their own choosing’. Those conditions, in turn, transform human beings
themselves. Under the pressure of events Bolshevism was slowly turning into
something other than itself, even as the Communist International crystallised
into a cohesive organisation. That something was to be called Stalinism,
although Joseph Stalin did not exercise real power until 1923 or 1924, and
only attained absolute power in 1928-29.
Chapter 4
Revolt in the colonial world
At the beginning of the 20th century a handful of ruling classes dominated the
world. The broad current of human history flowed through a narrow channel
shaped by a few European countries. The war itself was the supreme
expression of this—a world war resulting, essentially, from the imperial
ambitions of the rulers of Britain, Germany and France.
But by the end of the war waves of revolt were sweeping through the
colonial world and threatening these rulers’ dominance: an armed rising in
Dublin in 1916 was followed in 1918-21 by guerrilla war throughout Ireland;
there was an upsurge of demonstrations and strikes against British rule in
India; a near revolution against the British occupation of Egypt; and nationalist
agitation in China which began with student protests in 1919 and culminated in
civil war in 1926-27.
Resistance to Western domination predated the war. The colonisation of
Africa had only been possible through a succession of bitterly fought wars;
British rule in India had been shaken by the great revolt of 1857; and a wave of
attacks on Western interests and practices, known in the West as the ‘Boxer
Rebellion’, had swept China at the turn of the century.
However, such resistance characteristically involved attempts to reinstitute
the sort of societies which had succumbed to foreign conquest in the first
place.
But with the 20th century new currents of resistance attempted to learn
from and emulate the methods of Western capitalism, even when they took up
traditional themes. At the centre of these were students, lawyers, teachers and
journalists—groups whose members had studied in the language of the colonial
rulers, dressed in a European manner and accepted the values of European
capitalism, but had aspirations which were continually blocked by the policies
of the colonial rulers. There were many thousands of these in every colonial
city, and their demonstrations and protests could take over the streets, pulling
in much larger numbers of people with more traditional attitudes.
In India, by far Britain’s most important colony, there was a nationwide
campaign of resistance in the mid-1900s when the imperial authorities, as part
of their general divide and rule strategy, partitioned the subcontinent’s biggest
province, Bengal, into Muslim and Hindu areas. The campaign involved a
boycott of British goods under the slogan ‘Swadeshi’ (‘own country’), with
pickets, demonstrations and bitter clashes with the British-officered troops. It
drew together both a previously moderate organisation based on the English
speaking professional middle classes, the Indian National Congress, and
people such as B G Tilak, who combined a willingness to countenance
‘terrorist’ methods with encouragement of upper caste Hindu antagonism
towards Muslims on the grounds that Hinduism was the ‘authentic’ Indian
tradition. But wide sections of India’s privileged classes still clung to the
British connection. When the world war broke out both Tilak and Mahatma
Gandhi (who returned to India from South Africa in 1915) backed the British
war effort. The authorities found enough recruits to expand the Indian army to
two million, and sent most to join the carnage in Europe.
A new mood in China led to the collapse of the Manchu Empire. Both the
old and the new overseas-educated middle classes lost faith in an empire
which could not prevent the Western powers and Japan carving out ever larger
‘concessions’ and imposing ‘unequal treaties’. A military revolt in October
1911 was followed by the proclamation of a republic with newly returned
exile Sun Yat-sen as president. For 20 years Sun had been organising various
secret societies committed to national independence and liberal democracy.
But his hold on power slipped, and within a month he passed the presidency to
one of the old imperial generals, who set himself up as dictator, dissolving
parliament.
In Egypt a wave of anti-British nationalism arose in the first decade of the
century, which the authorities crushed by banning newspapers, imprisoning one
of the leaders and exiling the others.
The Irish rising
If India was Britain’s biggest colony, Ireland was its oldest, and had suffered
in the mid-19th century as much as any part of Asia or Africa. It was here that
the first modern rising against the colonial empires occurred, on Easter
Monday 1916.
For more than a century there had been two traditions of opposition to
British rule in Ireland. One was constitutional nationalism, which aimed to
force Britain to concede limited autonomy (‘Home Rule’) by winning seats in
the British parliament. The other was republicanism, committed to preparing
for armed rebellion through an underground organisation, the Irish Republican
Brotherhood or ‘Fenians’.
Prior to the war neither method had been successful. The various Fenian
conspiracies and revolts had all been easily broken by the British state, and
their leaders imprisoned. The constitutional nationalists had been no more
successful. In the 1880s they had obtained nominal support for ‘Home Rule’
from the Liberal wing of the British ruling class. But this would not deliver on
its promises, even in 1912-14 after the British House of Commons had passed
a Home Rule Act. Instead it temporised with the Conservative opposition,
which talked of a threat to the British ‘constitution’, with the anti Home Rule
‘Orange’ Loyalists, who openly imported arms from Germany, and with senior
army officers, who made it clear in the ‘Curragh Mutiny’ that they would not
impose the Home Rule law. Yet when war broke out in 1914 the constitutional
nationalists rushed to support the British war effort and helped persuade
thousands of Irish men to volunteer for the British army.
Then during Easter 1916 some 800 armed rebels seized control of public
buildings in the centre of Dublin, notably the General Post Office. Most of the
participants were republicans, led by poet and schoolteacher Padraic Pearse.
But alongside them fought a smaller number belonging to an armed militia, the
Irish Citizen Army. This had been established after the nine month Dublin
Lockout by James Connolly, the founder of Irish socialism and a former
organiser for the US Industrial Workers of the World.
The organisation of the rising went askew. The commander of one
participating group countermanded the order to mobilise, reducing the number
of participants by two thirds, and attempts to land German arms were thwarted
by British forces. But, above all, the population of Dublin reacted to the rising
with indifference. This led one exiled Polish revolutionary, Karl Radek, to
describe the whole affair as an abortive putsch. By contrast Lenin, also still in
exile, insisted it represented the beginning of a series of risings against
colonial rule that would shake the European powers.
The rising was certainly to shake British rule in Ireland eventually. The
measures a nervous British ruling class took to crush the rising—the
bombarding by warships of the centre of Dublin and the execution of its
leaders after they had surrendered under a white flag—created growing
animosity to British rule. This deepened in 1918, when the British government
prepared to introduce conscription in Ireland. Sinn Fein candidates committed
to boycotting the British parliament swept the board in the general election of
late 1918, with pro-British Unionist candidates even losing half the seats in the
northern province of Ulster. The Sinn Fein representatives met in Dublin to
proclaim themselves the new Dail (parliament) of an Irish republic, with one
of the commanders of 1916, Éamon De Valera, as president. Meanwhile the
armed rebels regrouped into a guerrilla force, the Irish Republican Army, led
by former clerk Michael Collins, and pledged its allegiance to the Dail.
Together they worked to make Ireland ungovernable through the boycott of
British courts and tax collectors, armed action, and strikes against British
troop movements.
The British reacted with all the ferocity characteristic of 300 years of
empire-building, imprisoned elected Irish leaders, hanged alleged rebels, used
murder gangs to assassinate suspected republicans, fired machine-guns into a
football crowd and established a mercenary ‘Black and Tan’ force, which
committed atrocities against civilians, burning down the centre of Cork. The
violence was all to no avail, except in the north east where sectarian Protestant
mobs armed by the British chased Catholics from their jobs and homes, and
eventually terrorised the nationalist population into submission.
Accounts of British cabinet meetings126 reveal a ruling class with no clear
idea of what to do. The Irish issue was embarrassing internationally, as it was
a popular issue for US politicians seeking to undermine the British Empire. It
caused immense political problems in Britain, where a considerable portion of
the working class was of Irish origin or descent. It even created problems
elsewhere in the empire when Irish soldiers in Britain’s Connaught Rangers
regiment mutinied in India. Yet the majority of cabinet ministers saw any
concession to Irish nationalism as a betrayal of the empire and an
encouragement to colonial revolts elsewhere.
Finally in 1921 the British prime minister, Lloyd George, stumbled on a
way out. In negotiations with an Irish delegation led by Collins he threatened a
scorched earth policy of all out repression unless the Irish agreed to leave the
six counties in northern Ireland under British rule, provide Britain with bases
in certain Irish ports, and keep an oath of allegiance to the British crown.
Under pressure from sections of the middle class, who feared what all out war
would do to their property, Collins accepted the compromise and won a
narrow majority in the Dail. De Valera rejected it, as did the majority of the
IRA, who saw it as a betrayal. Civil war broke out between the two groups
after Collins gave in to British pressure, accepted British weapons and drove
IRA members from the buildings they controlled in Dublin. By 1923, when the
republicans finally buried their guns, Lloyd George’s strategy had worked
perfectly.
There was an independent government of sorts in Ireland, but it ruled over
an impoverished country, cut off from the industrial area around Belfast and
with little hope of overcoming the devastating effects of hundreds of years of
British colonialism. Even when De Valera came to power through electoral
means in the early 1930s nothing fundamental changed except that a few more
symbols of British domination disappeared. For half a century the only way for
most young people to secure a future was to emigrate to Britain or the US. Life
for those who remained consisted of poverty on the one hand and domination
by the barren Catholicism preached by the Irish church on the other.
Meanwhile the North of Ireland was run right through until 1972 by a
Unionist Party under the domination of landowners and industrialists who used
Orange bigotry to turn the Protestant majority of workers and farmers against
the Catholic minority. James Connolly, executed after the 1916 rising, had
predicted that partition would result in ‘a carnival of reaction on both sides of
the border’. Events proved him right. British imperialism had been able to
play on the fears of the propertied classes of Ireland and emerge virtually
unscathed from the first great challenge to its power. It was a lesson it would
apply elsewhere.
The Indian national movement
The national movements in India, China and Egypt were paralysed at the
beginning of the war. But they had grown and intensified by the end of it. The
war increased the direct contact with modern capitalism of millions of Asians
and north Africans. Indian soldiers fought on the Western Front, in
Mesopotamia and at Gallipoli. Hundreds of thousands of Chinese, Vietnamese
and Egyptian people were used in a supporting role as labourers at the various
fronts. The war also boosted local industries, as hostilities cut off the flow of
imports and created massive new markets in war supplies.
The new industries brought with them the beginning of the same change in
class structures which had occurred with the industrial revolution in Europe—
the transformation of former peasants, artisans and casual labourers into a
modern working class. This class was still a very small proportion of the total
working population—less than half a percent in China’s case. But in absolute
terms it was quite sizeable: there were around 2.6 million workers in India,127
and some 1.5 million in China.128 They were concentrated in cities which were
central to communications and administration such as Bombay, Calcutta,
Canton and Shanghai—where the working class already amounted to one fifth
of the population and, according to Chesneaux in his history of the Chinese
labour movement, was ‘able to bring much more weight to bear than its actual
size in relation to the total population would warrant’.129
For the students, intellectuals and professional middle classes there were
now two potential allies in any challenge to the imperial powers and their
local collaborators. There were indigenous capitalists, who wanted a state
which would defend their own interests against foreigners, and there were
workers, who had their own grievances against foreign police, managers and
supervisors.
These changes occurred at the same time as the war increased the burden
on the mass of the population, for whom life was a continual struggle against
hunger and disease. War taxes and loans meant £100 million flowed out of
India to swell the imperial finances—paid for out of increased taxes and price
rises, which hit workers and poorer peasants alike.130
The pent-up bitterness in India was expressed in a wave of agitation
across the subcontinent in 1918-20. A textile strike in Bombay spread to
involve 125,000 workers. There were food riots in Bombay, Madras and
Bengal, and violent protests by debtors against money-lenders in Calcutta.
Mass demonstrations, strikes and rioting spread over many parts of India.131 A
General Dyer ordered his troops to open fire on thousands of demonstrators in
an enclosed square, the Jallianwala Bagh in Amritsar, killing 379 and
wounding 1,200. The massacre led to more demonstrations, and to attacks on
government buildings and telegraph lines. The first six months of 1920 saw
more than 200 strikes, involving 1.5 million workers. A government report
noted:
…unprecedented fraternisation between the Hindus and the Muslims…Even
the lower classes agreed to forget their differences. Extraordinary scenes of
fraternisation occurred. Hindus publicly accepted water from the hands of
Muslims and vice versa.132
Yet the very militancy of the protests worried the leaders of the nationalist
movement, of whom the most influential figure was Mahatma Gandhi. He was
the son of a government minister in a small princely state, who had studied to
be a barrister in London. But he found that dressing in peasant clothes and
stressing Hindu religious themes enabled him to bridge the linguistic and
cultural gap between the English speaking professional classes and the great
mass of Indians in the villages—in a way that the young Jawaharlal Nehru,
Harrow-educated and with a poor grasp of Hindi, could not. At the same time
Gandhi was close to a group of Indian capitalists who looked to the Indian
Congress to push their case for protected markets.
Holding together such a coalition of different interests meant discouraging
agitation which might spill over from conflict with British capitalists to
conflict with Indian capitalists. Gandhi’s answer was to stress peaceful,
disciplined, non-cooperation with the authorities. The man who had urged
support for British imperialism in its war with Germany only four years earlier
now made non-violence (ahimsa) a matter of principle. And there were tight
limits even to this peaceful non-cooperation, in case it turned into class
struggle. Gandhi refused to call for non-payment of general taxes, because it
could lead to peasants not paying rent to zamindars.
But a movement like that which swept India in 1918-21 could not be
disciplined in the way Gandhi wanted. The level of repression meted out by
the British police and military on the one hand, and the level of bitterness
among the mass of peasants, workers and the urban poor on the other, ensured
that peaceful protest would repeatedly escalate into violent confrontation—as
it did in Ahmedabad, Viramgam, Kheda, Amritsar and Bombay. In February
1922 it was the turn of Chauri Chaura, a village in Bihar. Police opened fire
after scuffles with a demonstration, people responded by burning down the
police station, killing 22 constables, and 172 peasants were killed in
retaliation.133 Without consultation with anyone else in the Congress
leadership, Gandhi immediately called off the whole protest movement and
gave the British authorities the breathing space they desperately needed. The
governor of Bombay, Lord Lloyd, later admitted that the campaign ‘gave us a
scare’ and ‘came within an inch of succeeding’.134 Now they had a free hand to
clamp down on the movement and arrest Gandhi. The movement was set back
ten years. Worse, religious divisions came to the fore now each group was left
to look after itself in the face of British power. There were bitter clashes
between Hindu and Muslim groups across the subcontinent in the mid-and late
1920s.
The first Chinese revolution
The upsurge in the national movement was even greater in China than in India,
with the newly formed industrial working class playing a greater role—and
suffering, in the end, a greater defeat.
On 4 May 1919 news reached China that the victorious powers meeting at
Versailles had granted the former German concessions in the country to Japan,
despite US president Woodrow Wilson’s promise of ‘the right of nations to self
determination’. Japanese, British and French interests already controlled the
railways, ports, rivers and waterways, and took a first share of taxes and
customs revenues, while police and soldiers of the foreign powers maintained
‘order’ in the key ‘concession’ areas of the major cities. Notoriously signs in a
Shanghai park proclaimed, ‘No dogs or Chinese allowed.’ Meanwhile, backed
by the different powers, rival Chinese generals, acting as warlords, divided up
the rest of the country. Many of the intelligentsia had put their faith in US
liberalism to end this state of affairs. Now they felt abandoned.
Student demonstrations became the catalyst for unleashing the feelings of
millions of people. They passed resolutions, flocked to meetings and
demonstrations, boycotted Japanese goods and backed a student-led general
strike in Shanghai. Students, the professional middle classes and growing
numbers of industrial workers were convinced that something had to be done
to end the carve-up of the country between the imperialist powers and the
economic decay of the countryside.
There was already a ‘renaissance movement’ among groups of students and
intellectuals. It believed there had been moments in China’s past when ideas
comparable to those of the Western Enlightenment had begun to emerge, only to
be strangled by the forces of Confucian orthodoxy. It set out to build on these
alternative traditions, in the words of one of its leading figures Hu Shih, to
‘instil into the people a new outlook on life which shall free them from the
shackles of tradition and make them feel at home in the new world and its new
civilisation’.135 This mood swept through the hundreds of thousands of students
and teachers in China’s ‘new style’ educational establishments.136 They
received some encouragement from Chinese capitalists and often identified
with Sun Yat-sen’s Kuomintang. But at the same time, the Russian Revolution
was having a major impact on some intellectuals and students, who began to
ask whether Marxism could make sense of what was happening in their
country. The interest in Marxism grew as China’s nascent working class was
increasingly involved in strikes and boycotts which grew in intensity,
‘affecting all regions and all branches of industry’.137
A series of strikes in 1922 showed the potential of the new movement. A
strike by 2,000 seamen in Hong Kong spread, despite a proclamation of
martial law, until a general strike by 120,000 forced the employers to
capitulate. A strike by 50,000 miners in the British owned KMAS in northern
China was not as successful. The mine’s private police, British marines and
warlord armies attacked the miners and arrested their union leaders.
Nevertheless, support for the strike from workers, intellectuals and even some
bourgeois groups enabled the strikers to hold out long enough to win a wage
rise. Chinese police broke up the first big strike by women workers—20,000
employees in silk-reeling factories—and brought the leaders before a military
tribunal. Clashes between British police and workers in British-owned
factories in Hankou culminated in a warlord shooting down 35 striking rail
workers and executing a union branch secretary who refused to call for a return
to work. Such defeats halted the advance of the workers’ movement, but did not
destroy the spirit of resistance. Rather they led to a hardening of class
consciousness and an increased determination to take up the struggle when the
opportunity arose.
This happened in the years 1924-27. Canton in the south had become the
focus of the nationalist intellectuals. Sun Yat-sen had established a
constitutional government there, but its hold on power was precarious, and he
was looking for wider support. He asked Soviet Russia to help reorganise his
Kuomintang and invited members of China’s recently formed Communist Party
to join. The value of this support showed when ‘comprador’ capitalists
connected with British interests tried to use their own armed force, the
100,000 strong Merchant Volunteers, against him. The Communist-led Workers’
Delegate Conference came to his rescue. Its Labour Organisations Army
helped break the power of the Merchant Volunteers, while print workers
prevented newspapers supporting them.
The power of combining workers’ protests and national demands was
shown again later in 1925 outside Canton. A general strike shut down Shanghai
after police fired on a demonstration in support of a strike in Japanese-owned
cotton mills. For a month union pickets armed with clubs controlled the
movement of goods and held strikebreakers as prisoners, while there were
solidarity strikes and demonstrations in more than a dozen other cities. Another
great strike paralysed Hong Kong for 13 months, raising nationalist demands
(such as equal treatment for Chinese people and Europeans) as well as
economic demands. Tens of thousands of Hong Kong strikers were given food
and accommodation in Canton, where:
The responsibilities of the strike committee went far beyond the normal field
of activity of a union organisation…During the summer of 1925 the committee
became, in fact, a kind of workers’ government—and indeed, the name applied
to it at the time…was ‘Government No 2’. The committee had at its disposal
an armed force of several thousand men.138
The strike helped to create an atmosphere in which the nationalist forces in
Canton began to feel they were powerful enough to march northwards against
the warlords who controlled the rest of the country. The march, known as ‘the
Northern Expedition’, began in the early summer of 1926. Commanded by
General Chiang Kai Shek, its organising core was a group of army officers
straight out of the Russian-run Whampoa training academy. Members of the
workers’ army created around the Hong Kong strike rushed to volunteer for it.
The march north was a triumph in military terms. The warlord armies, held
together only by short term mercenary gain, could not stand against its
revolutionary enthusiasm. Workers in the cities controlled by the warlords
went on strike as the Northern Expedition approached. In Hubei and Hunan the
unions armed themselves and became ‘workers’ governments’ to an even
greater extent than those in Canton during the Hong Kong strike.139 By March
1927 the expedition was approaching Shanghai. A general strike erupted
involving 600,000 workers, and an uprising by union militias took control of
the city before Chiang Kai Shek arrived.140 Power in the city passed into the
hands of a government controlled by the workers’ leaders, although it included
nationalist members of the big bourgeoisie. For a few days it seemed as if
nothing could stop the advance of revolutionary nationalism to destroy the
power of the warlords, break the hold of the foreign powers and end the
fragmentation, corruption and impoverishment of the country.
But these hopes were to be dashed, just as the similar hopes in Ireland and
India, and for similar reasons. The victories of the Northern Expedition
depended on the revolutionary mood encouraged by its advance. But the
officers of the army were drawn from a social layer which was terrified by
that mood. They came from merchant and landowning families who profited
from the exploitation of workers and, even more, from the miserable
conditions of the peasants. They had been prepared to use the workers’
movement as a pawn in their manoeuvres for power—and, like a chess piece,
they were prepared to sacrifice it. Chiang Kai Shek had already cracked down
on the workers’ movement in Canton by arresting a number of Communist
militants and harassing the unions.141 Now he prepared for much more drastic
measures in Shanghai. He allowed the victorious insurrectionary forces to
hand him the city and then met with wealthy Chinese merchants and bankers,
the representatives of the foreign powers and the city’s criminal gangs. He
arranged for the gangs to stage a predawn attack on the offices of the main left
wing unions. The workers’ pickets were disarmed and their leaders arrested.
Demonstrations were fired on with machine-guns, and thousands of activists
died in a reign of terror. The working class organisations which had controlled
the city only days earlier were destroyed.142
Chiang Kai Shek was victorious over the left, but only at the price of
abandoning any possibility of eliminating foreign domination or warlord
control. Without the revolutionary élan which characterised the march from
Canton to Shanghai the only way he could establish himself as nominal ruler of
the whole country was by making concessions to those who opposed Chinese
national aspirations. Over the next 18 years his government became infamous
for its corruption, gangsterism and inability to stand up to foreign invaders.
The episode was tragic proof that middle class nationalist leaders would
betray their own movement if that was the price of keeping workers and
peasants in their place. It was also a sign of something else—an abandonment
of revolutionary principles by those who now ran Russia, for they had advised
Chinese workers to trust Chiang even after his actions against them in Canton.
The experience of the nationalist revolution in Egypt was, in its essentials,
the same as that in China, India and Ireland. There was the same massive
ferment in the aftermath of the war, and a de facto alliance in 1919 between the
nationalist middle class and groups of strikers in industries such as the
tramways and railways. Repeated upsurges in struggle forced a limited
concession from Britain—a monarchic government which left key decisions in
British hands. Yet the main nationalist Wafd party turned its back on workers’
struggles and formed a government within the terms of this compromise, only
to be driven from office by British collaborators because it did not have
sufficient forces to defend itself.
Mexico’s revolution
Across the Atlantic, Mexico had experienced a similar upheaval as the world
war erupted in Europe. It had enjoyed nominal independence since the end of
Spanish rule in 1820. But a narrow elite of criollos, settler families, continued
to dominate the great mass of Indians and mixed-race mestizos, and the 33
year, increasingly dictatorial presidency of Porfirio Diaz saw growing
domination of the economy by foreign capital, mostly from the US. The rate of
economic growth was high enough by the first years of the 20th century to make
some people talk of a Mexican ‘miracle’,143 even though great numbers of
Indians were driven off their traditional communal lands and workers (who
numbered 800,000 in 1910, out of a total workforce of 5.2 million144) suffered
a deterioration in living standards.145 Mexican capitalists prospered in these
years as junior, and sometimes resentful, partners of the foreigners. But then
world financial crisis hit Mexico in 1907 and devastated its dreams of joining
the club of advanced countries.
Francisco Madero, the son of a wealthy family of plantation, textile mill
and mine owners, was able to gather middle class support for a campaign to
oust the dictator and provide a focus for mass discontent. Armed revolts broke
out, led in the north of the country by former cattle-rustler Francisco Villa, and
in the south by a small farmer, Emiliano Zapata. The dictator went into exile
and Madero was elected president.
But demands from Zapata’s peasant army for division of the big estates
upset many of Madero’s wealthy supporters—and the US government—even
more than the behaviour of the departed dictator. A long and bloody series of
battles followed. Madero’s army clashed with the peasant armies of the north
and south before Madero was murdered by his own general, Huerta, with the
backing of the US ambassador. Two wealthy members of the middle class,
Caranza and Obregon, formed a ‘Constitutionalist’ army to uphold Madero’s
approach. Zapata and Villa defeated Huerta, and occupied Mexico City.
A famous photograph of November 1914 shows Zapata and Villa together
in the presidential palace. This was the high point of the revolution, yet also its
end. The leaders of the peasant armies were incapable of establishing a
national power. They had no programme for uniting the workers and peasants
around a project for revolutionising the country, although Zapata later came
close to arriving at one. They evacuated the capital, retiring to their local
bases in the north and south to put up ineffectual resistance to Constitutionalist
generals who refused to implement genuine land reform.
The result was not immediate counter-revolution, as occurred 12 years
later in China. Carranza and Obregon continued to use the language of the
revolution, to resist pressure from the US, and to promise concessions to the
masses. It was not until Zapata was murdered in April 1919 that the Mexican
capitalists again felt secure. Even after that middle class politicians continued
to exploit the feelings raised by the revolution for their own purposes, running
the country as a virtual one-party state through an Institutionalised
Revolutionary Party. Yet Mexico remained safe for capitalism.
Leon Trotsky, writing in Moscow in 1927, drew the lessons from these
revolts in what we now call the Third World, building on Marx’s comments on
Germany after 1848 and his own analysis of Russia after 1905. Previous
commentators had noted the ‘uneven’ development of capitalism—the way it
took root in some parts of the world before spreading elsewhere. He shifted
the emphasis to ‘combined and uneven development’.146
Trotsky’s argument ran as follows: the rise of capitalism had created a
world system with an impact even on the most economically backward
regions. It tore apart the traditional ruling classes and undermined the
traditional middle classes. Control by colonial ruling classes, foreign capital
and competition from industries in already advanced countries cramped the
development of native capitalist classes. The middle class looked to break this
obstacle to its own advance by fighting for a fully independent national state.
But doing so risked stirring into action classes that it feared, for modern
transport systems and enclaves of modern industry had created combative,
literate working classes and dragged millions of people from the isolation of
their villages. Fear of these classes led the ‘national capitalists’ and much of
the middle class to forget their hostility to the old ruling classes or colonial
powers. Only ‘permanent’ revolution, in which the working class took the
initiative and drew behind it the bitterness of the peasantry, could fulfil the
national and democratic demands to which the national bourgeoisie paid lip
service.
This had happened in Russia in 1917. But it did not happen elsewhere in
the Third World. The world’s most powerful imperialism at the end of the
world war, Britain, was scarred by the revolts in Ireland, India, China and
Egypt, coming at a time of great industrial unrest in Britain itself and
revolutionary upheaval across Europe. Yet it kept a colonial empire which had
expanded to take in Germany’s colonies in Africa and most of the Ottoman
Empire’s Arab possessions. French, Belgian, Dutch, Japanese and an
increasingly forthright US imperialism were likewise preserved, adding to the
ability of capitalism to re-establish its stability.
Chapter 5
The ‘Golden Twenties’
The ‘new era’, the ‘Jazz Age’, the ‘Golden Twenties’—this was how media
and mainstream politicians extolled the United States of the 1920s. It had
emerged from the war as the world’s biggest economy, prospering while
Britain and Germany tore at each other, buying up many of Britain’s overseas
investments and continuing to grow until output in 1928 was twice what it had
been in 1914.
The growth was accompanied by a seemingly magical transformation in the
lives of vast numbers of people. The inventions of the 1890s and early 1900s,
which had previously been restricted to small minorities of the rich, now
flooded into mass use—the electric light, the gramophone, the radio, the
cinema, the vacuum cleaner, the refrigerator, the telephone. Henry Ford’s
factories were turning out the first mass produced car, the Model T, and what
had been a rich man’s toy began to be seen in middle class streets, and even
among some sections of workers. Aircraft flew overhead with increasing
frequency, and reduced the time of the cross-continental journey from days to
hours for the fortunate few. It was as if people had been plucked overnight out
of darkness, silence and limited mobility into a new universe of instant light,
continual sound and rapid motion.
The phrase ‘Jazz Age’ gave expression to the change. There had always
been popular musical forms. But they had been associated with particular
localities and particular cultures, since the mass of the world’s peoples lived
in relative isolation from one another. The only international or inter-regional
forms of music had been ‘classical forms’, provided for relatively mobile
exploiting classes, and sometimes religious forms. The growth of the city in the
18th and 19th centuries had begun to change this, with music and dance halls,
singing clubs and printed sheet music. However, the gramophone and radio
created a new cultural field receptive to something which expressed the
rhythms of the industrial world, the tempo of city life and the anguish of
atomised existence in a world built around the market. Jazz, or at least the
watered down jazz that formed the basis of the new popular music, could take
root in this. It was created out of a fusion of various African and European
‘folk’ idioms by the former slaves of the American South as they toiled to the
dictates of commodity production. It was brought North with a huge wave of
migration from the cotton and tobacco fields to the cities of the world’s most
powerful capitalism. And from there it appealed to millions of people of all
sorts of ethnic backgrounds and in all sorts of countries, carried forward on the
tide of capital accumulation.
All this happened as recession and unemployment became a mere memory
and people began to take ‘prosperity’ for granted. The US economist Alvin H
Hansen expressed the prevailing wisdom when he wrote in 1927 that the
‘childhood diseases’ of capitalism’s youth were ‘being mitigated’ and ‘the
character of the business cycle was changing’.147 Another economist, Bernard
Baruch, told an interviewer for the American Magazine in June 1929, ‘The
economic condition of the world seems on the verge of a great forward
movement’.148
The conflicts of the past also seemed a distant memory to the middle
classes. The defeat of the steel strike in 1919 had destroyed any will by the
American Federation of Labour trade union organisation to expand beyond the
narrow ranks of skilled workers. A series of police actions ordered by
attorney-general Palmer and future FBI boss J Edgar Hoover had smashed the
old militants of the IWW and the new militants of the Communist Party.
Workers who wanted to improve their own position saw little choice but to put
faith in the ‘American Dream’ of individual success—as future Trotskyist
strike leader Farrell Dobbs did when he voted Republican, planned to open a
shop and aspired to be a judge.149 Leading economists, businessmen and
political figures such as John J Raskob, chair of the Democratic National
Committee and director of General Motors, declared that ‘everybody ought to
be rich’ and claimed they could be if they put a mere $15 a week into stocks
and shares.150
There even seemed hope for the poorest groups in US society.
Impoverished white ‘dirt farmers’ from Appalachia and black sharecroppers
from the South flooded to look for work in Detroit, Chicago and New York.
These were the years of the ‘Harlem Renaissance’, when even the Northern
ghetto could seem like a beacon of hope to the grandchildren of slaves. There
was still immense black bitterness and anger. But it was channelled, in the
main, through the movement of Marcus Garvey, who preached a programme of
black separation, black capitalism and a ‘return to Africa’ which avoided any
direct conflict with the US system. For those who did not look below the
surface of events the ‘American Dream’ seemed to be accepted everywhere in
one form or another as the number of people buying and selling stocks and
shares grew to record proportions.
The arrival of the new era and the Jazz Age was delayed in Europe. In
Germany the crisis of 1923—when it seemed either socialist revolution or
fascist rule was on the agenda—was followed by a brief spell of savage
deflation. But then loans from the US (the ‘Dawes Plan’) gave capitalism a
new lease of life. Industrial production soared to overtake the level of 1914,
and political stability seemed restored. Elections in 1928 returned a Social
Democratic coalition government, while Hitler’s Nazis only received just over
2 percent of the poll and the Communists 10.6 percent. In the summer of 1928
Hermann Müller, leader of Germany’s Social Democrats, could exude
confidence: ‘Our economy is sound, our system of social welfare is sound, and
you will see that the Communists as well as the Nazis will be absorbed by the
traditional parties’.151
Britain had gone through a major social crisis two and half years after
Germany. The chancellor of the exchequer, Winston Churchill, was determined
to symbolise the restoration of British power by fixing the value of the pound
at its pre-war level against the dollar. The effect was to increase the cost of
Britain’s exports and lead to increasing unemployment in core industries. The
government set out to offset the increased costs by a general cut in wages and
an increase in working hours, starting with the mining industry. The miners’
union refused to accept this, and its members were locked out in May 1926.
Other union leaders called a general strike in support, only to call it off after
nine days, abjectly surrendering despite the effectiveness of the action, and
allowing the employers to victimise activists and destroy basic union
organisation in industry after industry.
Once the Ruhr crisis and the general strike in Britain were out of the way,
the tone of the new era in the US began to influence mainstream thinking in
Europe. The middle classes could benefit from the new range of consumer
goods produced by the mass production industries, and it seemed only a matter
of time before these spread to sections of workers. And if the US could escape
from economic crisis, so could Europe. In Germany Werner Sombart echoed
Hansen in stating, ‘There has been a clear tendency in European economic life
for antagonistic tendencies to balance each other, to grow less and finally to
disappear’.152 Not to be left out, Eduard Bernstein argued that his prophesies
of the peaceful transition of capitalism towards socialism were being fulfilled.
It would be absurd to call the Weimar Republic a ‘capitalist republic’, he
wrote. ‘The development of cartels and monopolies had brought about an
increase in public control, and would lead to their eventual metamorphosis
into public corporations’.153 Even in Britain, where unemployment continued
to plague the old industrial areas, the Trades Union Congress celebrated the
first anniversary of the miners’ defeat by embarking on a series of talks with
major employers, known as the Mond-Turner talks. The aim was to replace
conflict by ‘cooperation…to improve the efficiency of industry and raise the
workers’ standard of life’.154 A minority Labour government took office with
the support of the Liberals in 1929.
The belief that capitalism had achieved long term stability affected the
ruling group inside Russia. In 1925 its two increasingly dominant figures, party
general secretary Joseph Stalin and theoretician Nicolai Bukharin, took this
belief to justify their new doctrine that socialism could be achieved in one
country. Capitalism had stabilised itself, they claimed, making revolution
unlikely.155 Taking up the terminology of the German Social Democrat
Hilferding, Bukharin argued that the West had entered a stage of ‘organised
capitalism’, which permitted rapid economic expansion and made crises much
less likely.156
The birth of the new
If middle class public opinion and popular culture seemed to recover some of
their pre-war optimism in the mid-1920s, the recovery was precarious. A
generation of young men in Europe had seen their illusions trampled in the mud
of Flanders, and it was not easy to forget this. The atmosphere was closer to
cynical self indulgence than reborn hope.
This found its reflection in the ‘high art’—the painting, sculpture, serious
music and literature—of the period. Even before the war there had been a
minority challenge to the comfortable belief in steady progress. The
mechanisation of the world already seemed double-edged—on the one hand
displaying an unparalleled power and dynamism, and on the other tearing to
shreds any notion of human beings ordering their own lives. Philosophical and
cultural currents emerged which questioned any notion of progress and gave a
central role to the irrational. These trends were encouraged as developments in
theoretical physics (the special theory of relativity in 1905, the general theory
of relativity in 1915 and Heisenberg’s ‘uncertainty principle’ version of
quantum physics in the mid-1920s) undermined the old mechanical model of
the universe. At the same time the popularity of psychoanalysis seemed to
destroy the belief in reason, once so important for Freud himself.157
Artists and writers attempted to come to terms with the novelty of the
world around them by a revolution in artistic and literary forms. The
‘revolution’ was based on an ingrained ambiguity—on both admiration of and
horror at the mechanical world. What came to be known as ‘Modernism’ was
born. Characteristically the emphasis was on formalism and mathematical
exactness, but also on the discordance of clashing images and sound, and
dissolution of the individual and the social into fragmented parts. High culture
up until the mid-19th century (the Hungarian Marxist critic Georg Lukács
argued that 1848 was the key date) had centred on attempts by middle class
heroes and heroines to master the world around them, even if they were often
tragically unsuccessful.158 The high culture of the period after the First World
War centred on the reduction of individuals to fragmented playthings of powers
beyond their control—as, for example, in Kafka’s novels The Trial and The
Castle, in Berg’s opera Lulu, in T S Eliot’s poem The Wasteland, in Dos
Passos’s trilogy USA, in the early plays of Bertolt Brecht and in the paintings
of Picasso’s ‘analytical Cubist’ phase.
Yet the internal fragmentation of works of art and literature which simply
reflected the fragmentation around them left the best artists and writers
dissatisfied, and they tried with varying degrees of success to fit the pieces
into some new pattern which restored a place for humanity in a mechanical
world. The difficulty of doing so within a reality which was itself fragmented
and dehumanised led many to draw political conclusions. Already by the
1920s Italian ‘Futurists’ had embraced the blind irrationality of fascism and
Russian Futurists had embraced the Russian Revolution’s rational attempt to
reshape the world. Through much of the decade most Modernists tried to evade
a choice between the two through a self conscious avant-gardism which
deliberately cut them off from popular culture, even if borrowing some of its
idioms. They may not have shared in the illusions of those years, but they did
little to publicly challenge them. However disillusioned with the ‘Golden
Twenties’, their Modernism still took its assumptions for granted.
The world had been through a dozen years of war, revolution and colonial
rising. But by 1927 the consensus in international ruling class circles was that
the trauma was over. There were not too many dissenters when US president
Coolidge declared in December 1928, ‘No Congress of the United States has
met with a more pleasant prospect than that which appears at the present time.’
Few people had any inkling of the horror to come.
Chapter 6
The great slump
The hopes of the Jazz Age came crashing down on ‘Black Thursday’, 24
October 1929. On that day the US stock exchange fell by almost a third. Rich
speculators who had bet their entire fortunes lost everything, and newspapers
reported 11 Wall Street suicides. Large numbers of people lost their life
savings. It was the end of an era for all those who had come to believe in
‘money for nothing’.
The crash was an expression of more deep-seated flaws in the system. The
German, US and British economies were already beginning to turn down when
it occurred.159 Now their output began to plunge, with the US leading the way
down. By the end of 1930 their output was lower than it had been in the
previous post-war recessions. The new US president, Herbert Hoover,
claimed prosperity was ‘just round the corner’, but the slump grew deeper. If
1930 was bad, 1931 and 1932 were worse, with 5,000 local banks in the US
and two major banks in Germany and Austria going bust. By the end of 1932
world industrial output had fallen by a third, and that of the US by 46 percent.
There had never been a slump that went so deep or lasted so long. Three
years after it started there was still no sign of recovery. In the US and Germany
fully one third of the workforce were jobless, and in Britain one fifth. It was
not only industrial workers who were hit in Germany and the US. White collar
workers, who still regarded themselves as middle class, were thrown on the
scrapheap, and farmers were hard-pressed by the banks as prices for their
crops slumped.
Just as a war in Europe automatically became a world war, so a slump in
the US and Western Europe became a world slump. It devastated Third World
countries whose economies had been tailored to produce food and raw
materials. Suddenly there was no market for their output. People only recently
pulled into the world of money were deprived of access to it, yet they no
longer had any other means of obtaining a livelihood.
The crisis did not just hit the exploited classes. It wreaked havoc within
the ruling class, as long-established firms went bust. Financiers were terrified
of joining the ranks of the bankrupt, and industrialists saw their profits
disappear along with their markets. They turned to the state to help see off
foreign competition, and there were successive devaluations of national
currencies as the capitalists of each country tried to undercut the prices of
rivals. Country after country imposed tariffs and quotas, taxing and restricting
imports. Even Britain, the bastion of free trade since 1846, opted for such
methods. World trade fell to a third of the 1928 figure. But despite the myths
spread by some politicians and economists since, it was not the controls on
trade which created the slump—which was well underway before they were
introduced—but the slump which led to the controls.
The slump tore apart the lives of those who had been impoverished
observers of the ‘Golden Twenties’. They were to be found trudging the streets
of all the West’s great cities, with gaunt, tired faces and in threadbare coats, on
their way to or from soup kitchens. They were also to be found on the peasant
holdings of the rest of the world, dreading the loss of their land, worried that
the price of their crops would never rise sufficiently to pay rents and taxes, and
trying to keep alive on what they could grow themselves. Those who were
least ‘advanced’ in capitalist terms—subsistence farmers still barely integrated
into the cash economy—survived best. Those who relied on selling their
labour power had nothing to fall back on. Even the old escape route of
emigration to the Americas was blocked by mass unemployment.
In London, Chicago, Berlin and Paris; in Glasgow, Marseilles and
Barcelona; in Calcutta, Shanghai, Rio, Dublin, Cairo and Havana—
everywhere there was the same desolation, everywhere a bitterness that could
ignite into new hope or turn into crazed despair.
The 1930s was a decade in which the forces of hope and despair fought on
the streets of every city. It was a decade when revolution and counter-
revolution were at each other’s throats. It ended in a victory for counter-
revolution which plunged the world into another war, accompanied by
barbarities which put even the slaughter of 1914-18 in the shade.
Russia: the revolution turned upside down
Communism was one beneficiary of the slump in the West and the Third World.
The breakdown of capitalism confirmed what revolutionary socialists had
been arguing for a decade and half, and those who fought most energetically
against the effects of the slump were the Communists. They led the unemployed
demonstrations which police baton-charged in New York, Chicago, London,
Birkenhead, Berlin and Paris. They fought desperate defensive struggles
against wage-cutting in the mines of Fife and South Wales, the fruit fields of
California and the car plants of Paris. They faced trial in British-controlled
India for organising unions, tried to build peasant guerrilla armies in China,
organised in the shanty towns of white-ruled South Africa and risked their
lives confronting racism in the American South.
The 1930s is sometimes called the ‘red decade’, because of the appeal
Communism had for many intellectuals. Already by 1933 it was drawing
people towards it like US novelists John Steinbeck, John Dos Passos,
Theodore Dreiser, James T Farrell, Richard Wright and Dashiell Hammett,
Scottish novelist Lewis Grassic Gibbon, English writers W H Auden and
Christopher Isherwood, French novelist André Gide and German playwright
Bertolt Brecht. Alongside them were a host of lesser known figures, trying to
write ‘proletarian’ novels, taking ‘agitprop’ theatre to the masses and
expressing themselves in small literary magazines. The swing left among
intellectuals was an expression of a much wider mood among people who
wanted some alternative to the horrors of the slump, a mood to be found among
a minority of workers in factories and dole queues everywhere. Most never
joined the Communist parties, but they saw Communism as the alternative even
if they could not quite bring themselves to embrace it.
For most people Communism in the 1930s was indistinguishable from the
Soviet Union, and meant emulating its revolution elsewhere. Yet by the time of
the Wall Street Crash there was virtually nothing of the revolution of 1917 left
in Russia.
As we have seen, Lenin had already commented before his death in 1924
about the ‘deformations’ and bureaucratisation afflicting the workers’ state.
These had grown to a monstrous degree in the mid-1920s. The revolutionary
regime had only been able to recover from the physical devastation and
extreme hardship of the civil war by making the concessions to internal
capitalism which were known as the New Economic Policy, or NEP. There
followed a slow rise in the living standards of the mass of the population. But
there was also a growing influence of layers of the population hostile to the
revolutionary spirit of 1917—petty capitalists, small ‘NEP-men’ traders and
well-to-do kulak peasants employing others as wage labourers. Industry
remained in state hands but was subject to market pressures, and the recovery
of industrial production was accompanied by a relatively high level of
unemployment. Whereas in 1922 some 65 percent of managing personnel in
industry were officially classified as workers, by 1923 only 36 percent
were.160
If the regime was still in some way socialist at the time of Lenin’s death
this was not because of its social base, but because those who made decisions
at the top still had socialist aspirations. As Lenin wrote, ‘The party’s
proletarian policy is determined at present not by its rank and file, but by the
immense and undivided authority of the tiny sections of what might be called
the party’s “old guard”.’161 But as Lenin lay dying the ‘old guard’ was being
corroded by the influences eating away at the rest of the party. Lenin’s last
political act was to write a testament which argued for Stalin’s removal as
party secretary because of his crudely bureaucratic treatment of other party
members. The dominant group in the party leadership of Zinoviev, Kamenev,
Bukharin and Stalin chose to ignore this testament and keep it secret.162
The circumstances in which they found themselves were increasingly
dragging them away from the principles of 1917. They relied on a bureaucratic
apparatus to run the country, and the personnel of this apparatus relied, in turn,
on making concessions to the better-off peasants, the mass of NEP-men and the
new layer of ‘Red’ industrialists. They were more concerned with placating
these groups than with the interests of the workers who had made the
revolution.
This provoked dissent within the party, and even within the party
leadership. Already in 1920-21 a group calling itself the ‘workers’ opposition’
had argued at conferences, in party publications (which were still open to it)
and in 250,000 copies of a pamphlet (printed on party presses) that workers
were losing out. But it was unable to put forward any practical proposals for
dealing with the general impoverishment of the country. In 1923-24 wider
opposition arose, with an open letter from 46 old Bolsheviks critical of the
bureaucratisation of the party. This ‘Left Opposition’ coalesced around
Trotsky, president of the St Petersburg soviet of 1905, organiser of the October
insurrection and founder of the Red Army. It argued that the only way forward
lay in three connected sets of measures—the expansion of industry so as to
increase the social weight of the working class, an increase in workers’
democracy, and an end to bureaucratic tendencies within the party and the
state. These alone could preserve the health of the workers’ state until the
revolution spread internationally.
There was a torrent of abuse against the opposition such as the party had
never known before. For every article putting the Left Opposition’s point of
view in the party press there were ten by the leadership denouncing them.
There was diatribe after diatribe against ‘Trotskyism’, and Trotsky himself
was demoted from the key position of head of the Red Army to a secondary
role as minister for science and technology, while Stalin accumulated
increasing power in his own hands.
How bureaucratised the party had become was shown in 1926, when
Stalin and Bukharin fell out with Zinoviev. The Petrograd district organisation
which had until then virtually unanimously backed Zinoviev now just as
unanimously denounced him. Zinoviev and his supporters were subject to the
same sort of attacks that had previously been directed at Trotsky and the Left
Opposition.
It was at this point that Stalin and Bukharin gave expression to the
bureaucratic conservatism of much of the party by embracing a completely new
doctrine known as ‘socialism in one country’. Previously all the leaders of
Bolshevism had been agreed that while workers could establish a state of their
own in a single country they could not advance to full socialism on that basis.
Overcoming the heritage of 5,000 years of class society would only be
possible by utilising all the means of production created by modern industrial
capitalism—and these existed on a world scale, not in one country, and
certainly not in a backward country like Russia. Eventually the revolution had
to spread or die.
Not only had Lenin reiterated this on numerous occasions, but Stalin
himself had insisted in his book Lenin and Leninism, published in 1924:
The main task of socialism—the organisation of socialist production—still
remains ahead. Can the task be accomplished, can the final victory of
socialism in one country be achieved without the joint efforts of the proletariat
of several advanced countries? No, this is impossible…For the final victory of
socialism, for the organisation of socialist production, the efforts of one
country, particularly of such a peasant country as Russia, are insufficient.163
Such was the importance Stalin attached to Marxist theory and scientific
rigour, however, that in the next edition of the book he simply removed the
‘No’ and the ‘insufficient’!
Stalin and Bukharin represented a ruling group which feared and fought
anything that might disturb its position of bureaucratic privilege. Its chief
characteristic was inertia and complacency. The idea that Russia could simply
ignore the outside world, rely on its resources and, as Bukharin famously put
it, ‘build socialism at a snail’s pace’, fitted such a mood. That was why every
party functionary involved in daily compromises with industrial managers,
better-off peasants or get-rich-quick traders rushed to support Stalin and
Bukharin in their attacks on those who tried to remind them of workers’
democracy and world revolution. This enabled the ruling group to resort to
ever more repressive measures against the opposition, using police to break up
a demonstration in support of the opposition by some Petrograd workers on the
tenth anniversary of the October Revolution,164 expelling the opposition from
the party, exiling them to remote areas and finally deporting Trotsky from the
USSR.
Even so, until 1928 the atmosphere in Russia was still very different from
that which characterised the 1930s—something that is ignored by many works
on Stalin’s gulag of concentration camps. The Red terror had been wound
down after the civil war. There were only 30,000 prisoners in the camps in
1928 and they were not compelled to work. This was still not a totalitarian
regime.
As Michael Reiman has written, on the basis of a study of archives from
the period:
Although repression, especially political repression, continued to be
widespread, the technique of mass preventive terrorism was virtually
abandoned. A normal peacetime framework of legality and the observance of
legal procedures was established. Everyday civilian life had re-emerged. The
NEP era’s distinctive culture came into its own, with its restaurants,
confectioneries and places of entertainment. A richer artistic and ideological
life also developed…Workers…actually experienced the positive aspects of
the new trade union laws, labour’s new rights, and the freer conditions of the
supervision in the factory…Stalin’s authority was still limited. Although his
power was great, it was not unlimited.165
But the whole structure defended by Stalin and Bukharin had inbuilt
weaknesses which came to a head just as they banished the opposition. Its
stability depended on the peasantry continuing to deliver grain to the city, even
though the level of output of industrial goods was not high enough to satisfy
their needs, and on Western capitalist powers abandoning any dreams of
rolling back the revolution by military force. In fact neither condition could
last. As some sections of the peasants grew richer they demanded more from
the state and took action to get it. And the major capitalist powers, still driven
to divide the world between them, had not lost their desire to carve up Russia.
Both issues came to a head in the middle of 1928. The peasants began
refusing to sell their grain to the cities, and Britain, until then Russia’s biggest
trading partner, broke off diplomatic relations and imposed a virtual ban on
trade. A political crisis convulsed the Kremlin. As Reiman explains:
The changed international situation critically affected internal relations in the
USSR. The authority of the party leadership was severely undermined…
Confusion and disorientation were felt in political circles. The party
leadership…was beset by increasing nervousness and anxiety.166
The ruling group split down the middle. Bukharin desperately wanted to
continue as before. But that would have meant the bureaucracy surrendering
some of its power at home to placate the peasants and abandoning any real
hope of resisting future foreign demands. At first Stalin was at a loss to know
what to do, but then moved to a policy which offered the bureaucracy a
possibility of strengthening itself at home and abroad—enforced
industrialisation, to be paid for by seizing grain from the peasants by force.
Such a policy suited those running the industrial plants. ‘The drive for further
expansion’, one study of the period reports, ‘came as much from officials and
managers—many of them now party members—as from party leaders’.167 It
also provided the means to produce tanks, battleships, aircraft and machine-
guns on the same scale as the Western states and to ward off threats of foreign
attack.
Stalin insisted:
To slacken the pace of industrialisation would mean to lag behind, and those
who lag behind are beaten…We are 50 to 100 years behind the advanced
countries. We must make good this lag in ten years or they will crush us.168
The bureaucracy’s path of forced industrialisation in order to match the
West militarily had a logic of its own. Production of ‘investment goods’—
plant, machinery and raw materials that could be used to produce more plant,
machinery and raw materials—rose at the expense of consumer goods. The
proportion of investment devoted to producing the means of production rose
from 32.8 percent in 1927-28 to 53.3 percent in 1932 and 68.8 percent by
1950.169 But this meant the goods which the peasants wanted in return for
feeding the growing mass of industrial workers were not produced.
The only way to obtain the food was by further use of force against the
peasants. Stalin followed the logic of this by moving on from seizing grain to
seizing land. The collectivisation of land—in reality the state expropriation of
the peasantry—was the other side of forced industrialisation. It led to an
increase in the surplus available to feed the towns and sell abroad for foreign
machinery. But it also resulted in a fall in total agricultural output.
Collectivisation caused enormous hardship among the peasants. Millions
of small and middle peasants were denounced as kulaks and herded into cattle-
trucks for deportation. Tens of millions went hungry as their grain was seized.
Workers also suffered a fall in living standards, which were cut by an
estimated 50 percent in six years.170 Such pressure on the mass of the
population could not be imposed without an unprecedented police regime.
Every protest had to be mercilessly crushed. Every channel by which workers
or peasants could express themselves had to be closed. The trade unions were
subordinated completely to the state. Vast numbers of people were dragged off
to the labour camps, so that the number in them was 20 times higher by 1930
than it had been in 1928.171 Any section of the bureaucratic apparatus which
showed signs of sympathy with the workers and peasants also had to be
punished, along with any intellectuals who—even inadvertently—produced
novels, poems or music which might act as a focus for discontent. Debate
within the party disappeared, to be replaced by ritual condemnation of the
latest ‘deviation’. The artistic experimentation of the 1920s was replaced by a
dull conformism mislabelled ‘socialist realism’. Executions, rare between the
civil war and 1928, now became commonplace. There were 20,201 in 1930—
more than twice as many as at the end of the civil war in 1921. The grisly total
peaked in 1937 at 353,074—almost 40 times the 1921 figure.172
Show trials, which sentenced people to execution or the living death of the
labour camps, did not merely serve as a deterrent to others. The depiction of
the accused as ‘Trotskyist foreign agents’ deflected mass bitterness away from
the regime towards alleged ‘saboteurs’. The climax of the terror in 1936-37
involved the condemning to death of all the remaining members of Lenin’s
central committee of 1917, except for Stalin, Alexandra Kollontai, now
Stalin’s ambassador in Sweden, and Leon Trotsky, who survived in exile, to be
assassinated by one of Stalin’s agents in 1940.
For decades supporters of Stalin claimed he was Lenin’s heir, fulfilling the
aspirations of 1917. It is a claim repeated, although with negative rather than
positive connotations, by many supporters of Western capitalism today. Yet
Stalin was careful to ensure the Bolsheviks of 1917 were the first to suffer in
the terror of the mid-1930s. Only one in 14 of the Bolshevik Party members of
1917 and one in six of those of 1920 were still in the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union in 1939.173 Many of the rest had been executed or sent to the
camps. As Leon Trotsky repeatedly emphasised, far from Stalinism being the
simple continuation of Leninism, there was a river of blood between the two.
Stalin’s logic was the same as that of any capitalist who faces competitive
pressure from a bigger rival—to tell his workers to make every conceivable
‘sacrifice’ in order to compete. For Stalin the way to ‘catch up with the West’
was to copy all the methods of ‘primitive accumulation’ employed elsewhere.
The British industrial revolution had been based on driving the peasants from
the land through enclosures and clearances; Stalin smashed peasant control of
the land through ‘collectivisation’ which forced millions to migrate to the
cities. British capitalism had accumulated wealth through slavery in the
Caribbean and North America; Stalin herded millions of people into the slave
camps of the gulag. Britain had pillaged Ireland, India and Africa; Stalin took
away the rights of the non-Russian republics of the USSR and deported entire
peoples thousands of miles. The British industrial revolution had involved
denying workers the most elementary rights and making men, women and
children work 14 or 16 hours a day; Stalin followed suit, abolishing the
independence of the unions and shooting down strikers. The only significant
difference was that while Western capitalism took hundreds of years to
complete its primitive accumulation, Stalin sought to achieve Russia’s in two
decades. Therefore the brutality and barbarity was more concentrated.
The Stalinist bureaucracy could not ‘catch up’ by copying the small-scale
‘market’ capitalism of England during the industrial revolution. It could only
succeed militarily if its industries were similar in size to those of the West. But
there was no time to wait for private firms to grow as they gobbled each other
up. The state had to intervene to bring about the necessary scale of production.
State capitalist monopolies, not small private firms, were necessary, and the
state had to coordinate the whole economy, subordinating the production of
everything else to accumulation.
Most people saw the resulting system as socialist, and many still do. For
Stalinism did break the backbone of private capitalism in Russia, and later did
the same in Eastern Europe and China. But its methods were very similar to
those of the war economies of the West. It planned, as they planned, so as to
hold down the consumption of the masses while building heavy industry and
arms production.
Westerners who witnessed this in the 1930s were bewitched by the
economic success of the USSR, and so were many observers from the Third
World who saw the rapid industrial advance of the USSR in the 1950s and
early 1960s. It seemed that, whatever its faults, Stalinism had found a way of
escaping from the crises which beset the market capitalism of the rest of the
world. The British Fabians Sidney and Beatrice Webb, lifelong opponents of
revolution, visited Russia in the mid-1930s. They were so impressed that they
wrote a book entitled The Soviet Union: A New Civilisation? By the second
edition they were even more impressed, and removed the question mark.
Yet the USSR could not escape the world in which it found itself, even in
the 1930s. State direction enabled its industries to expand while those of the
rest of the world contracted, but only at an enormous price to its people. Even
the world recession had a direct impact. Stalin financed the import of foreign
machinery by selling grain from the Ukraine and Kazakhstan. When the price
collapsed after 1929, he had to sell twice as much, and at least three million
peasants starved to death as the state seized their grain.
The abandonment of world revolution
Stalinism was not simply a response to isolation. It also perpetuated that
isolation. The theory of ‘socialism in one country’ led to the imposition of
policies on Communist parties in the rest of the world which damaged the
chances of revolution.
During a first phase of the Stalin-Bukharin alliance the search for
respectable allies in the West meant loving up to the British TUC through an
‘Anglo-Soviet trade union agreement’, even as the TUC betrayed the general
strike. British trade unionists were encouraged to raise the slogan, ‘All power
to the general council of the TUC’, although the most cursory glance at the
record of the British trade union leaders would have revealed how they would
use such power.
In the same months the search for allies in the East meant praising Chiang
Kai Shek. Even after he had attacked workers’ organisations in Canton, Stalin
and Bukharin told Chinese Communists in Shanghai and elsewhere to put their
trust in him.174
There was a change in the policies expected of foreign Communist parties
when ‘socialism in one country’ shifted from being ‘socialism at a snail’s pace’
to forced industrialisation. They were suddenly told in 1928 that they were in a
new ‘third period’ of revolutionary advance. The principal enemy was now the
same left wing inside the social democratic parties and the trade unions which
the Russian leadership had been praising so highly only a few months earlier.
Stalin and his followers declared that these people were now ‘social fascists’
and as dangerous as the far right. Communists everywhere had to direct most of
their fire against them, refuse to ally with them under any circumstances and, if
necessary, form breakaway trade unions.
New leaders who would accept such policies were imposed on the foreign
Communist parties, and nearly everywhere there were expulsions of
established leaders who would not go along with them. What was Stalin’s
motive in performing this 180 degree turn? Part of the rationale was to cover
up for the mistakes made in Britain and China. After forbidding the Chinese
Communists to criticise Chiang Kai Shek in March 1927 as he prepared to
butcher them, Stalin and Bukharin then pushed the Communists to try and seize
power in Canton in November. The balance of forces was completely against
them, and the result was a bloodbath, but it created a climate in which it was
very difficult to criticise Stalin and Bukharin for being too conservative. The
turn fulfilled other functions as well. The sense of a desperate, heroic struggle
internationally fitted with the desperate scramble to industrialise Russia
regardless of the impact on the lives of the mass of people. The turn also
enabled Stalin to weed out anyone in the international movement who might
conceivably criticise what was happening in Russia. It ensured the final
transformation of foreign Communist parties into organs of Russian foreign
policy.
The ‘third period’ was disastrous for the foreign parties. The crisis which
erupted in 1929 radicalised a substantial minority of workers and created
growing sympathy with Communist propaganda about the evils of capitalism.
But it made many workers cling to the security of the established social
democratic parties and unions. It was usually young workers and the
unemployed who moved in a radical direction, since demonstrations which ran
up against bloody police repression were the only effective means the
unemployed had of expressing their anger. By contrast, those workers with
jobs were often so terrified of losing them that they listened to calls for
‘moderation’ from parliamentary and trade union leaders.
These workers were bitter too. When employers gave them little choice
but to strike they could do so in the most militant fashion. But usually their
bitterness was bottled up, not finding expression until they felt they had a
chance of fighting successfully. The splits in the ruling class created by the
crisis could suddenly open new possibilities for workers’ struggles, as could
upturns in the economy, however short-lived, which led to firms employing
more workers. So the years after 1929 saw many sudden upsurges of militant
forms of struggle: the revolutionary overthrow of the Spanish monarchy and a
massive revival of the workers’ movement; a revolutionary upheaval in Cuba;
a huge upsurge of the French left, leading to the formation of a ‘Popular Front’
government and the occupation of the major factories; and the birth of mass
trade unionism in the US culminating in an occupation at the world’s largest
car manufacturer, General Motors.
But nowhere did this happen instantaneously with the onset of the crisis—
there was a time lag of two, four or six years—and nowhere did it simply
dissolve the influence of the old social democratic and union organisations
overnight. Typically, sections of the social democratic leadership maintained
and even increased their influence for a time by adopting much more left wing
language than previously. Those who simply denounced these leaders as
‘social fascist’ were cut off from the workers who followed them.
This was the mistake the Communist parties made for almost six years
under Stalin’s influence. They attracted people radicalised by the crisis. But
then they led them into battles which, cut off from the wider layers of workers
influenced by the trade union and social democratic organisations, they could
not win. A battle-hardened minority of party members persisted and fought on
despite the odds. But many, often a majority, of members dropped away, beaten
into submission by hardship, hunger and victimisation at the hands of the
employers. The figures for membership of the Communist parties show this.
The membership of the Czechoslovakian party fell from 91,000 in 1928 to
35,000 in 1931, the French party from 52,000 to 36,000, the US party from
14,000 to 8,000, and the British party from 5,500 to 2,500.175
The party did grow in one country—Germany. The effects of the crisis
were even graver there than in the US, since many of those who lost their jobs
in the slump had lost their savings in the inflation only seven years before,
while high interest rates hit the middle classes, small businessmen and farmers
very heavily. Amid feelings of insuperable economic and social crisis right
across society, party membership grew from 124,000 in 1928 to 206,000 in
1931, and the Communist vote grew from 3.2 million in 1928 to 4.6 million in
1930 and 5.9 million in November 1932.
But a huge portion of the party membership were unemployed. Some 51
percent of the Berlin members were jobless in 1930, as against 40 percent
working in factories, and only 17 percent of the national party membership
were in a position to undertake party activity in their workplaces in 1931.176
What is more, the turnover of party membership was incredibly high, about 40
percent in Berlin.177 Meanwhile, although the Social Democrats lost votes,
they still won 7.2 million in November 1932 and took 84 percent of seats on
factory committees, as against only 4 percent for the Communists.178
By denouncing the Social Democrats as social fascists, the Communists cut
themselves off from the mass of workers who, however confused, wanted to do
something about the economic crisis and resist Hitler’s Nazis. The
consequences of following Stalin’s instructions were not only to be damaging
to the party, but disastrous for humanity.
Hitler’s road to power
Social democratic parties of the Labour type dominated the governments of
Europe’s two biggest countries at the time of the Wall Street Crash in October
1929. In Britain Labour’s Ramsay MacDonald had formed a minority
government dependent on Liberal support earlier in the year, while the German
Social Democrat Müller headed a ‘grand coalition’ formed with the ‘moderate’
bourgeois parties the year before.
Neither government had any idea of how to cope with the crisis which
engulfed them by 1930. Increased unemployment meant increased expenditure
on benefits. Reduced industrial production meant less tax revenue. Government
budgets began to run into deficit. Financial instability hit both countries—US
bankers demanded repayment of the ‘Dawes Plan’ loans which had boosted the
German economy in the mid-1920s and financiers began to gamble against the
international exchange rate of sterling. The heads of the national banks, Schacht
in Germany (appointed five years before as a representative of the liberal wing
of the ruling class) and Montagu Norman in Britain (a member of the Baring
banking family), told their governments to reduce the cost of the insurance
funds providing unemployment benefits. The governments fell apart under the
pressure. In Germany the finance minister—the one time ‘Austro-Marxist’
economist and former Independent Social Democrat Rudolf Hilferding—could
not cope, and the government fell early in 1930. In Britain MacDonald and his
chancellor Philip Snowden opted to abandon the Labour Party and join the
Conservatives in a national government.
The economic crisis was less severe in Britain than in Germany and the
US. British industry still had privileged access to huge markets because of the
empire. Prices fell more rapidly than wages and salaries, and the middle class
prospered even while unemployed workers suffered in the old industrial areas
of the north, Scotland and South Wales. The national government cut the dole
and salaries in the public sector, provoking riots among the unemployed, a
brief mutiny in the navy and a wave of anger among groups like
schoolteachers. But it easily survived the crisis, thrashed a demoralised
Labour Party in general elections in 1931 and 1935, and convinced the major
section of British capitalism that there was a way out of the crisis. Those
members of the ruling class who were prepared to endorse Oswald Mosley’s
British variant of fascism in 1933 and 1934 (for instance the Rothermere
family, whose Daily Mail infamously declared, ‘Hurrah For The Blackshirts’)
had generally abandoned it by 1936.
Things were very different in Germany. Unemployment rose to about 50
percent higher than in Britain, and much of the middle class suffered extreme
impoverishment. The crisis led to a surge in support for Adolf Hitler’s
National Socialist (or Nazi) Party. Its vote shot up from 810,000 to more than
six million in 1930, and then doubled to 37.3 percent of the total poll in July
1932. But the Nazis were not simply (or even mainly) an electoral party. At the
core of their organisation were paramilitary street fighters—the SA or
Stormtroopers—numbering 100,000 at the end of 1930 and 400,000 by mid-
1932. These armed thugs were dedicated to battling against those they blamed
for the social crisis—attacking supposedly ‘Jewish’ finance capital on the one
hand and a supposedly ‘Jewish’, ‘Marxist’ working class movement on the
other. It was the existence of this armed force, prepared to battle for control of
the streets and conquer all other social organisations, which distinguished
Nazism and fascism from the established bourgeois parties.
The first successful organisation of this kind was that created by Mussolini
in Italy after 1920. Its members were bound together by an intense nationalist,
rather than anti-Jewish, ideology (some leading fascists, such as the mayor of
Rome in the mid-1920s, were Jewish, and anti-Semitism did not feature in
fascist ideology until after the alliance with Hitler in the late 1930s). But in
other respects Mussolini blazed the trail that Hitler was to follow.
Hitler’s party had first come to prominence in the crisis year of 1923, with
the French occupation of the Ruhr and the great inflation. It was at the centre of
a circle of right wing terror organisations, anti-Semitic groups and former
Freikorps members who gathered in the Bavarian city of Munich. But an
attempt to seize power in the city in November 1923 failed dismally, and the
party went into decline as the crisis conditions disappeared. By 1927-28
Hitler’s party was a marginal force electorally, its membership only a few
thousand and its leaders perpetually quarrelling. Then the outbreak of the
world economic crisis gave it an enormous boost.
Ever-greater numbers of people flocked to Hitler from the ‘moderate’
bourgeois parties, for these supported governments presiding over a crisis
which was driving not just workers but many of their own middle class
supporters into poverty and bankruptcy. In the small town of Thalburg, for
example, the Nazi vote leapt in three years from 123 to 4,200 at the expense of
the other bourgeois parties.179
Like the Italian fascists, the Nazis were a party of the middle classes. A
large proportion of their members before Hitler took power were self
employed (17.3 percent), white collar employees (20.6 percent) or civil
servants (6.5 percent). All of these groups were represented in the Nazi Party
at rates between 50 and 80 percent higher than in the population as a whole—
and all were regarded as much more socially privileged than would be the
case today. There were workers who joined the Nazis, but at a rate about 50
percent less than their proportion in the population as a whole.180 The Nazis
did pick up some working class votes. But many of these were the votes of
agricultural workers in areas like eastern Prussia, where attempts at
unionisation immediately after the war had been broken and traditions of
working class politics hardly existed; the votes of workers in small towns,
where the influence of the middle classes was greatest; or the votes of the
unemployed, who were atomised and sometimes attracted by the benefits of
Nazi, and especially Stormtrooper, membership.181 This makes a nonsense of
attempts to deny the middle class character of Nazism—as Michael Mann
does, for instance, when he claims that ‘studies show only a low correlation
between Nazi voting and class’.182
But why were the middle classes attracted to the Nazis and not to the left?
Partly this had to do with decades of anti-socialist indoctrination. The self
employed and white collar workers had been brought up to believe that they
were superior to manual workers and tried to cling on to what separated them
from the mass of workers as the crisis deepened. Their bitterness against
governments and financiers was matched by their fear of the mass of workers
just below them. Yet this had not prevented many of them acquiescing to the
idea that some sort of socialist change was inevitable in the revolutionary
period of 1918-20.
The other factor in the situation was the behaviour of the left itself. The
German Social Democrats learned nothing from the experience of their Italian
predecessors. Instead they repeated ad nau-seam that ‘Germany is not Italy’.
Kautsky insisted on this in 1927, claiming that in an advanced industrial
country fascism could never repeat its Italian success of ‘dredging up…large
numbers of lumpen elements ready to serve capitalist ends’.183 Hilferding was
still repeating the same message a matter of days before Hitler took office in
January 1933. By sticking to the German constitution, he said, the Social
Democrats had forced the Nazis onto the terrain of ‘legality’, which would
defeat them—as shown by President Hindenburg’s refusal of Hitler’s request
to form a government the previous summer. ‘After the Italian tragedy comes the
German farce…It marks the downfall of fascism,’ he argued.184
The stress on constitutionalism led the Social Democratic leaders to
follow a policy of ‘toleration’ toward the successive governments which
presided over the worsening crisis after they themselves abandoned office in
1930. These governments, led first by Brüning, then von Papen and finally von
Schleicher, ruled without majority parliamentary support, dependent on the
power to govern by decree open to the president. Their measures led to
successive attacks on the conditions of workers and the lower middle classes
—one decree from Brüning imposed a 10 percent cut in wages—but could not
stop the deterioration of the economy and the hardship which accompanied it.
Through their ‘toleration’ policy the Social Democrats were saying, in effect,
that all they could offer was hardship and hunger. They left the field open to the
Nazis to pick up the support of those who abandoned the old bourgeois parties.
The Social Democrats seemed to go out of their way to make things easy
for Hitler. They built a self defence organisation of sorts, the Reichsbanner,
made up of militants and members of socialist sports associations and youth
organisations. It had the potential to mobilise hundreds of thousands. Yet they
insisted it was for defensive purposes only, for use only if the Nazis broke the
constitution—a moment which never came. They also controlled the Prussian
state government and with it a large well-armed police force. They had used
the police to shoot down Communist-led demonstrators on May Day in Berlin
in 1929, killing 25, and they banned Nazi demonstrations throughout Prussia in
1930 and 1931. But their very constitutionalism led them to abandon this
weapon as the Nazi menace reached a high point in the summer of 1932. In the
presidential elections of that year they did not stand a candidate of their own
but urged their supporters to vote for the aged Hindenburg—who then repaid
them by agreeing with von Papen, who was secretly negotiating with Hitler, to
issue a decree overthrowing the Social Democratic government in Prussia. The
Social Democrats meekly obeyed this, abandoning what they had claimed was
the strongest bulwark against Nazism. The SA Stormtroopers were now free to
parade openly, creating the impression of a dynamic all-powerful movement
which might somehow get rid of the conditions which were making life so
difficult and drive the opposition from the streets. There could hardly have
been a greater contrast to the Social Democrats’ paralysis in the face of the
worst slump people had ever known.
No wonder there was bewilderment among Social Democrat activists. As
the historian of the rise of Nazism in the town of Thalburg writes of the Social
Democrats, by the beginning of 1933:
…many expected a Nazi takeover. They planned to fight, but it was no longer
clear what they were fighting for. For the republic of General von Schleicher
or von Papen? For democracy under rule by presidential decree? During the
grey January of 1933 Thalburg’s SPD held no meetings, sponsored no
speeches. What was there to say?185
The immobility of the Social Democrats left the field clear for the Nazis.
But the Nazis could not have come to power merely on the back of their
electoral support. Their highest vote in free elections was 37.1 percent, and
they actually lost two million votes between July and November 1932. Even
with Hitler as chancellor and mass intimidation of the opposition they won
only 43.9 percent of the vote in March 1933. Late in 1932 Goebbels
complained in his diary that the Nazis’ failure to take power was causing
demoralisation in the ranks, with thousands leaving.
What gave the Nazis power was the decision by key representatives of the
German ruling class to hand it to them. There had long been sections of big
business which gave money to the Nazis, seeing them as a useful counterweight
to the left and the unions. The newspaper magnate Hugenburg had ‘relieved…
Hitler’s…financial dilemmas in his early years’.186 By 1931 Fritz Thyssen, a
leading Ruhr industrialist, was ‘a keen Nazi supporter’,187 and the former
national bank chief Schacht was increasingly sympathetic.188
But until 1932 the main sections of German capitalism had supported two
parties more or less under their direct control—the big industrialists backed
the German People’s Party (successor of the pre-war National Liberal Party),
and Hugenburg and the big landowners backed the German National Party.
They distrusted the Nazi Party because many of the impoverished middle class
people in its ranks—and some of its leaders—not only attacked the ‘Marxist’
organisations of the workers but also called for a ‘national revolution’ directed
against big business.
As the world slump hit their profits the views of sections of capital began
to change. Even the majority of industrialists, who did not finance Hitler and
distrusted a movement that had grown up independently of them among the
impoverished middle class, began to feel they could use the Nazis for their
own ends. As one study concludes:
The increasing severity of the depression convinced most of the leaders of the
upper class that the Treaty of Versailles had to be eliminated, that reparations
had to be cancelled, and that the power of labour had to be broken before the
depression could be overcome…In the summer of 1931 leaders of big business
adopted the characterisation of the Weimar Republic as a ‘system of
dishonour’, and called for ‘national dictatorship’.189
Such views were shared by the Ruhr industrialists, the big landowners and
the bulk of the officers corps in the armed forces. They were also close in
many respects to the policy Hitler put forward. The proximity increased when
Hitler purged Otto Strasser, the most outspoken proponent of the ‘national
revolution’ approach, took part in a joint conference with the National Party,
the People’s Party, industrialists and landowning groups at Harzburg in
September 1931, and then ‘addressed captains of the Ruhr industry’ in January
1932.190
The industrialists were increasingly reassured that Hitler would not
damage their interests, while some saw his Stormtroopers as a useful tool in
smashing the workers’ movement. By the autumn of 1932 most industrialists
believed the Nazis had to be in the government if it was to be powerful enough
to pursue the policies they wanted and weaken working class resistance. They
were still divided on exactly how important the Nazi presence was to be. The
majority wanted the key posts to be in the hands of politicians they trusted from
the old bourgeois parties, like von Papen. Only a minority were pushing at that
time for Hitler to be put in charge. Their attitude was that they needed Hitler as
a guard dog to protect their property and, like any guard dog, he should be kept
on a tight chain. But Hitler would not accept this, and the mood of big business
began to shift as the government of military chief von Schleicher proved
incapable of meeting their requirements. Even if many elite industrialists were
not keen on the jumped-up former corporal, with his wild talk, they began to
accept that he alone commanded the forces necessary to restore bourgeois
stability. Von Papen himself held a meeting with Hitler at the home of a banker.
He told the British ambassador a few days later, ‘It would be a disaster if the
Hitler movement collapsed or was crushed for, after all, the Nazis were the
last remaining bulwark against Communism’.191
The big landowners, the established business backers of Hitler like
Schacht and Thyssen, and sections of the military high command were already
pressuring the president, Hindenburg, to resolve the political crisis by
appointing Hitler chancellor. Von Papen threw his weight and that of the heavy
industrial interests who relied on him behind that pressure. There were still
important sections of industry which had their doubts, but they put up no
resistance to this solution, and once Hitler was in power they were quite
willing to finance the election he called in order to boost his parliamentary
fortunes (and overcome the crisis within the Nazi ranks).192 Hitler would not
have got anywhere had he not been able to organise a mass movement of the
middle classes, to some extent in opposition to the immediate political
preferences of major sections of German big business. But at the end of the day
they regarded him coming to power as better than continued political
instability—and certainly as much better than his collapse and a shift of
German politics to the left.
Hitler took office on 31 January 1930. Many Social Democratic supporters
wanted to fight. Braunthal tells of:
…the most impressive demonstrations of the German workers’ will to resist.
On the afternoon and evening of 30 January, spontaneous and violent mass
demonstrations of workers took place in German cities. Delegations from the
factories…from all parts of the country arrived on the same day in Berlin in
expectation of battle orders.193
Yet the SPD leaders decided Hitler had come to power ‘constitutionally’,
and their followers should do nothing! Its daily paper Vorwärts boasted, ‘In the
face of the government and its threats of a coup d’état, the Social Democrats
and the Iron Front stand foursquare on the grounds of the constitution and
legality’.193a The party devoted its efforts to preventing ‘premature’ resistance
to the new regime.
The desire for resistance from rank and file Social Democrats was a
feeling the Communist Party could have tapped throughout the preceding three
years. But its leaders had refused to demand that the Social Democratic
leaders join a united front to stop the Nazis from 1929 all the way through to
1933, either out of stupidity or out of deference to Stalin. Individuals who
began to have doubts about the policy were removed from positions of
influence. The ultimate absurdity had come in the summer of 1931. The Nazis
had organised a referendum to remove the Social Democratic government in
Prussia, and the Communist leaders, on orders from Stalin, had declared this a
‘Red referendum’ and told their members to campaign for a ‘yes’ vote! It is
difficult to imagine a gesture more calculated to stop rank and file Social
Democrats looking to the Communists for a way to resist the Nazis.
This does not mean the Communists were any sort of allies of the Nazis, as
is sometimes claimed. In places such as Berlin, Communist groups fought
desperate street battles day after day to drive back the Nazis.194 But they did so
cut off from a wider base of support.
Like the cowardice of the Social Democrats, the lunacy of the Communist
leaders persisted even after Hitler took office. They did not learn from what
had happened in Italy and believed the Nazis would act like any other
bourgeois government in power. They insisted the Nazi dictatorship was
fundamentally unstable and likely to be short-lived.195 Their slogan was, ‘After
Hitler, us.’ In Moscow the party paper Pravda spoke of the ‘rousing success of
the German Communist Party’, while Radek, a former Left Oppositionist now
completely under Stalin’s thumb, wrote in Izvestia of a ‘defeat like the defeat
on the Marne’ for the Nazis.196
In line with this perspective, Communist activists in Germany were told to
keep on the offensive, with mass leafleting and petitioning directed against the
new government. But Hitlerism differed from other bourgeois governments
precisely because it had a mass of supporters prepared to crack down on any
element of working class resistance, hunting out militants, ensuring employers
sacked union activists, and joining the secret police to smash centres of
opposition to the regime. Anyone who signed a petition was likely to be beaten
up by the SA and picked up by the police.
Within a few days the paramilitary forces of the Nazis were being
integrated into the state machine. The SA Stormtroopers and the police worked
together to harass the working class parties. Then, on 27 February, the Nazis
used a fire in the Reichstag as an excuse to ban the Communist Party, suppress
its press and drag off 10,000 of its members to concentration camps.
The cowardly stupidity of the Social Democrat leaders persisted to the
end. They believed the repression directed at the Communists would barely
touch them, and they expelled members who talked about underground
resistance. The trade union leaders even promised to cooperate with the Nazis
in turning 1 May into a ‘day of national labour’. On 2 May the Nazis carted
these leaders off to concentration camps as well.
Between the accession of Hitler and the outbreak of war in 1939 around
225,000 people were sentenced to prison for political offences, and it is
estimated that ‘as many as a million Germans suffered, for a longer or shorter
time, the tortures and indignities of the concentration camps’.197
Workers’ organisations were not the only ones to suffer. Having won the
support of the parties of big business—the National Party and the People’s
Party—for his onslaught on the Communists, the Social Democrats and the
unions, Hitler turned on them, forcing them to dissolve and accept a Nazi one-
party state. He used state terror to destroy the independence of all sorts of
organisations, however respectable and middle class—lawyers’ groups,
professional associations, even the boy scouts suffered. If any put up resistance
the political police—the Gestapo—would cart off some of the more active
members to the concentration camps. Fear silenced any overt disagreement
with totalitarian policies.
Nazi rule remained, however, based upon a direct agreement with big
business and the officer corps of the army. These were left relatively
untouched by Nazi violence, free to make profits or expand their military
capacity, while the Nazis were given control over the means of repression and
the whole of political life. The alliance was sealed in blood a year later by the
‘Night of the Long Knives’, when Hitler used his own bodyguard, the SS, to
murder leaders of the SA Stormtroopers whose talk of a ‘second revolution’
worried the generals and industrialists. In return these allowed Hitler to take
over the presidency and concentrate all political power in his hands.
Chapter 7
Strangled hope: 1934-36
The scale of the Nazi victory in Germany caused shockwaves across Europe. It
had dismantled the world’s most powerful working class movement virtually
overnight. It was a lesson that right wing forces elsewhere were quick to learn,
and one which workers’ organisations had to try and digest, however
unpalatable that was to leaders who had insisted on the inviolability of a
constitutionalist approach or the imminence of a Communist victory.
Vienna 1934
The first concerted moves by the right to copy some of Hitler’s methods came
in 1934 in Austria, France and Spain. Austria’s ruling class had tolerated the
Social Democrats presiding over coalition governments in the immediate
aftermath of the collapse of its empire in 1918-19, since there was continued
revolutionary upheaval in neighbouring states, and vigorous workers’ and
soldiers’ councils in Austria itself, which only the Social Democrats could
hold back from bidding for power. As one Austrian Social Democrat later
wrote, ‘The Austrian middle class parties were almost impotent, and the task
of defending Austrian democracy fell to the Social Democrats’.198 Once the
upheavals had died down the Social Democrats left the government and
concentrated on using their control of the city council in Vienna to improve
workers’ living conditions. Vienna was a bastion of the party, which had
600,000 members in a country with a total adult urban population of only three
million, and won 42 percent of the poll in national elections.
But right wing Catholic politicians dominated the countryside and had a
majority in parliament. Inspired by Mussolini’s success in Italy, by the late
1920s they had established a paramilitary force, the Heimwehr, which clashed
increasingly with the defence force of the Social Democrats, the
Republikanischer Schutzbund.
Hitler’s victory in Germany boosted the confidence of Austria’s fascists,
even though it also split them in two—between those who wanted Austria to
merge with Germany and those wanting a Catholic state allied with Italy. The
leader of this second group, Dollfuss, took advantage of the situation in early
March 1933 to dispense with parliament and rule by emergency decree.
Dollfuss took token action against the pro-German Nazis, but his main
target was the workers’ movement:
The socialist defence corps was dissolved; socialist-governed Vienna was
arbitrarily deprived of a considerable part of its income; socialist workers
were ordered under threat of losing their jobs to join Dollfuss’s new party, the
Patriotic Front…Dollfuss officially announced his plan to abolish
parliamentary democracy forever and to rebuild Austria as a Christian,
corporate and federal state.199
The Austrian Social Democrats had boasted after 1919 that they were
more left wing and more willing to fight the right than the German Social
Democrats. They also boasted that because of this the Communists had barely
been able to grow in Austria and the country’s working class movement was
weakened by division like Germany’s. But their response to Dollfuss’s coup
was to do nothing.
They were in a strong position. The strength of the working class had been
shown only a few days earlier, when railway workers had won a clear victory
in an all out strike. Instead, the Social Democrats hoped that Dollfuss would
somehow form an anti-Nazi front with them. They told their members to be
prepared for action, but not to do anything ‘premature’.
The situation dragged on like this for 11 months, with Dollfuss making
piecemeal but systematic attacks and the Social Democrats continuing to tell
their supporters to be patient. At a meeting of 1,000 factory delegates in Vienna
a Social Democrat leader rejected calls for immediate action, saying, ‘So long
as there is the slightest chance of averting the horror of civil war we are bound
by honour and conscience to take it’.200 As the Social Democrat Braunthal
recalled:
The Austrian workers felt profoundly disappointed and discouraged. This
feeling of desolation grew all the deeper by the evasive tactics of the party
executive towards the rising tide of Austrian fascism.201
Dollfuss was left a free hand to move decisively against the socialists at
the moment of his own choosing. He did so on 12 February 1934, after his
deputy had declared, ‘We are going to start cleaning up Austria. We shall make
a complete job of it’.202
Early in the morning police searched for arms in the socialist headquarters in
Linz. Workers in the house resisted and firing began. Three hours later the
Viennese electrical workers struck—the pre-arranged signal for a general
strike…Then firing began in Vienna. The civil war had come.
It lasted four days. All possible bad fortune seemed to be in store for the
workers. A small minority of socialist workers, mainly members of the
Republican Defence Corps (the Schutzbund), took up arms—as far as arms
were available…No official call for a general strike could be sent out, since it
had been forgotten to make arrangements with the electrical workers for use of
the socialist printing presses. The mass of workers sympathised with the
fighting members of the Republican Defence Corps, but they did not strike.
Discouraged, demoralised, they worked, while close by small socialist groups
were overwhelmed by cannon and machine-guns…By 16 February the fighting
was over. Eleven men were hanged…The Austrian labour movement was
driven underground.203
Despite the defeat, the fact that the Austrian workers’ movement eventually
fought back against fascism and did not simply surrender, as in Germany,
proved an inspiration to anti-fascists in other countries. ‘Better Vienna than
Berlin’ became a slogan around which a new left wing crystallised in many
social democratic parties.
In Austria itself, Dollfuss’s followers hung on to power for four years with
a regime sometimes described as ‘clerico-fascist’. Then, in 1938, Mussolini
made a deal with Hitler, German troops took over the country to cheers from
middle class crowds and there was full Nazification.
Events in Germany had demonstrated that the workers’ movement could not
stop fascism unless it was prepared to fight in a united manner. Austria showed
that unity alone was not enough—there had to be a preparedness to fight.
France and the Popular Front
Paris also seemed close to civil war in February 1934. Successive
governments of the centre Radical Party had responded to the world economic
crisis with deflationary policies which cut the pay of public sector employees
and the incomes of the peasants, who still made up a majority of the
population. At the same time a series of banking scandals had implicated
leading figures in the governing party.
Popular bitterness led to a growing atmosphere of disorder, with protests
by civil servants, demonstrations by small shopkeepers and small
businessmen, and violent mass action by peasants. The far right, organised
around various paramilitary ‘leagues’, was able to take advantage of this,
parading through the streets and attracting growing middle class support for its
combination of nationalism, ultra-Catholicism, denunciation of ‘corrupt’
financiers, and anti-Semitism.
By the beginning of 1934 the far right had hopes of emulating Hitler’s
victory of a year before. On 6 February its organisations called a huge
demonstration in Paris against the recently formed ‘left of centre’ government
of the Radical Party’s Eduard Daladier. Their aim was to invade the Chamber
of Deputies and force Daladier’s replacement by a right wing government, so
opening the door to power for themselves.
A night of vicious fighting followed, as demonstrators and police shot at
one another, with a total of 15 deaths and 1,435 wounded. Daladier resigned
the next day, fearing he could no longer keep order, and a ‘right of centre’
Radical replaced him. The far right had shown it had the strength to ‘unmake’ a
government by force, and France seemed set to follow the path of Italy and
Germany.
The French left had previously seemed as incapable of responding as the
left elsewhere. The Socialist Party (SFIO) tolerated the Radical Party in
government, much as the German Social Democrats had tolerated Brüning. The
Communists repeated the ‘third period’ nonsense that the Socialist Party were
‘social fascists’. On 3 February, as the right wing mobilisation became more
violent, the Communist paper L’Humanité carried the headline ‘No Panic’,
while on 5 February it declared that the choice between the fascists and the
government was between ‘plague and cholera’.204 When it called a protest on
9 February, which led to bitter fighting with the police and nine dead, it did so
on its own and claimed the demonstration was against both the fascists and the
‘killers’ in Daladier’s fallen government.205
The major union federation, the CGT, called for a general strike on 12
February, and the Socialist Party separately called for a demonstration. Only at
the last minute did the Communist Party decide to demonstrate as well, but
separately from the other organisations. It was far from certain what would
happen when the demonstrations met. People feared they would end up fighting
each other, as had happened in the past. Instead, as they drew close together,
people began chanting the same anti-fascist slogans and melted into a single
demonstration. According to one account, ‘This encounter triggered off a
delirious enthusiasm, an explosion of shouts of joy. Applause, chants, cries of,
“Unity! Unity!”’ 206
The success of the general strike and the united demonstration halted the
right’s advance. A formal agreement between the Communists and Socialists
led to gains for both in elections at the expense of the Radicals. At the same
time a merger between the CGT and a Communist-led breakaway led to some
growth in union membership. Anti-fascist committees mushroomed across the
country to challenge the right for control of the streets.
Then the Communist Party went even further in its policy shift. It called for
a pact not just with the Socialists, but with the Radical Party as well, on the
grounds that although it was a bourgeois party it stood for preserving the
republic. When the ‘Popular Front’ of the Socialists, Communists and Radicals
gained a clear majority in the elections of May 1936 it claimed this as
definitive proof that its approach was correct. Certainly, the left did well
electorally. For the first time the Socialists were the biggest party in the
assembly, while Communist representation shot up from ten to 76. The
Socialist leader Leon Blum was able to form a government containing 18
Socialists and 13 Radicals. The Communists were not in the government, but
voted for it in the assembly.
However, the mood in the streets and workplaces was much more
impressive than the Socialist-Radical government—after all, the two parties
had held enough seats in parliament to have formed such a government at any
point in the previous four years. A series of huge left wing demonstrations
culminated in a 600,000-strong commemoration of the Paris Commune. The
biggest wave of strikes France had ever known was beginning even before
Blum’s government took office. What started as a scattering of short and
isolated but victorious strikes in different parts of France—Le Havre,
Toulouse, Courbevoie—suddenly turned into a powerful movement on 26 May,
when workers in engineering factories in the Paris suburbs struck and occupied
their plants. On 28 May the huge Renault plant at Billancourt in Paris struck
and occupied, and by the end of the week 70,000 workers were involved.
After a lull for the Whitsun bank holiday the occupations spread beyond
engineering to all sorts of industries and to virtually every part of the country
—chocolate factories, print works, building sites, locksmiths, even to
department stores in Paris where there were no unions and workers had
previously been afraid to talk to one another. In the Nord département alone
1,144 workplaces were occupied, involving 254,000 workers. The British
ambassador compared the situation to Russia in 1917, with Blum in the
position of Kerensky.207
The employers, who had been willing to look favourably on the advance of
the far right only two years before, were now desperate for Blum to settle the
strikes even if it meant making enormous concessions to the workers. At a
special meeting in the prime minister’s residence on 7 June they signed an
agreement for the immediate establishment of labour contracts, substantial
wage increases and the election of workers’ delegates in all factories
employing more than ten workers. Three days later the government presented
bills to parliament introducing two weeks paid holiday and limiting the
working week to 40 hours. The bills passed in a record seven days. Even the
Senate, elected on an undemocratic basis which gave the right built-in strength,
did not dare oppose them.
Among many workers there was a feeling they wanted more than just wage
increases, a shorter working week and holidays. They wanted somehow to
change society in its entirety. The strikes continued until 11 June, when the
Communist Party intervened with a speech by its leader, Maurice Thorez. He
claimed that since ‘to seize power now is out of the question’, the only thing to
do was to return to work. ‘It is necessary to know how to end a strike,’ he
said.208
The most militant strikers, who looked upon the Communists as the far left,
reluctantly began to accept a return to work on the conditions offered. This
gave them material gains—although inflation was soon to eat into their wage
increases. But it left power in the hands of the old police, generals and top
civil servants, who had shown their sympathy with the far right over the
previous years. And it left control over industry and finance in the hands of
capitalists who would try to grab back the concessions made in June the
moment the balance of forces changed.
Thorez was right that conditions were not yet ripe for workers to take
power, any more than they had been ripe in February or even July 1917. But
they were such that the Communists could have put into effect the slogan they
had ritually raised until only two years before—for the creation of soviets,
structures of workers’ delegates which could oversee and challenge the power
of the state and big business. However, Thorez did not even mention this,
although the mood of workers would have ensured a favourable reception for
such a call.
The omission was not an accident. The abandonment of the absurd ‘third
period’ policy had depended on changes in Comintern (Communist
International) thinking in Moscow, as had the adoption of the policy of Popular
Front alliance with a bourgeois pro-capitalist party. Stalin wanted foreign
policy allies to cement the defence pact with the USSR signed by the right of
centre Laval government in 1935. Communist support for a ‘liberal’ capitalist
government seemed to make such an alliance easier. The Comintern
accordingly argued that it was the only ‘practical’ way of blocking the path of
fascism—although its central arguments were no different to those used by
people like Bernstein 40 years before.
The Communists could not ally with parties like the Radicals without
dropping any concrete revolutionary alternative to the crisis hitting the world
system. Talk of revolutionary change became something to be projected into the
distant future, while they ‘tolerated’ governments committed to keeping
capitalism intact, in the hope that this would stop the capitalists being attracted
to the options of the far right. But toleration meant holding back the workers’
movement until it was demoralised and the capitalists had enough confidence
to take the offensive.
There was a celebration of the Popular Front movement in France on 14
July 1936. A demonstration of up to a million people commemorated the
anniversary of the French Revolution in Paris, while there were other
demonstrations thousands-strong in towns across France. People dressed in the
costumes of the revolutionary years. There were giant pictures of revolutionary
and Enlightenment heroes—Robespierre, Voltaire, Marat, Victor Hugo. The
Radical Party leader Daladier stood on the speakers’ platform in Paris
alongside Thorez and Blum. A banner carried by Renault workers bore the
emblem of the Radical Party alongside those of the Socialist and Communist
parties. The whole affair was designed to convince people that if only they
stood together, regardless of party or class, and identified with a single French
republican tradition, then the nightmare of fascism would go away. Here were
the ‘practical’ politics of Popular Front unity.
Three days later events took place across the Pyrenees which put this
‘practical’ politics to the test. Inspired by the victories of the fascists in Italy,
Germany and Austria, generals staged an uprising against the republican
government of Spain, which immediately requested arms from France to
defend itself. Leon Blum wanted to provide the arms, but leading Radical
politicians were vehemently opposed. On 30 July Blum assured the Chamber
of Deputies that no arms were being sent, and had soon agreed a ‘non-
intervention’ policy—even though this meant abandoning the elected
republican government to the attacks by fascist-inspired forces armed by
Germany and Italy. The Communist Party in France objected strongly to Blum’s
stance. It even abstained in a no-confidence vote in the chamber in December
1936. Yet it had no alternative to offer, since it too preferred a coalition with
the liberals to building a movement to confront French capitalism.
It was a policy which could no more work domestically than in
international affairs. The Radicals were only prepared to go along with
reforms in favour of workers so long as the wave of strikes continued—as it
did through much of the second half of 1936, although in a more subdued
manner than in late May and June. As the Socialist Party, the Communist Party
and the CGT leaders succeeded in cooling things down, the Radicals began to
revert to demanding deflation to deal with the symptoms of economic crisis.
After experimenting with ‘reflationary’ policies designed to create jobs, such
as the shorter working week, Blum began to concur with the Radicals early in
1937, announcing a ‘pause’ in his programme of expansion and reform. It was
not enough.
In July 1937 he resigned after the Senate rejected his Finance Bill amid a
financial crisis caused by a flight of capital. In the meantime the state had
shown how little it had been changed by the spell of Popular Front government
—the police had opened fire on an anti-fascist demonstration in a Paris suburb
in March 1937, killing six demonstrators.
Radical Party governments with Socialist Party participation ruled France
for the next nine months. A new world depression began in the US even before
the previous one had finished, and the government reacted with the old Radical
policy of cutting expenditure—a policy that could only demoralise those who
had placed hope in the Popular Front. A crisis caused by Hitler’s march into
Austria and the collapse of French foreign policy in Eastern Europe brought
Blum back to office for 26 days before he was replaced by Daladier. The
employers now felt strong enough to take on the workers, and the Daladier
government set out to reverse one of the most important reforms of two years
before—the reduction of the working week to 40 hours. The police intervened
to suppress the strikes and occupations which followed. At Renault a 20 hour
battle followed after 1,500 armed police invaded the factory.209 The police
forced the defeated workers to march out of the factory making the fascist
salute and shouting, ‘Long live the police’.210
As Julian Jackson observes in his history of the period:
The Popular Front, born out of the general strike of 12 February 1934, finally
died of that on 30 November 1938. Ironically the 12 February strike had
originally been conceived to protest against the forced resignation of Daladier,
and the strike of 30 November was called to protest against the labour policy
of the same Daladier.211
The first phase of the Popular Front had seemed to offer hope, and the left
parties and the unions grew rapidly. Communist Party membership increased
from 29,000 in 1933 to 90,000 in February 1936 and 288,000 in December
1936, and that of the Communist Youth from 3,500 to 25,000 and then 100,000.
The Socialist Party grew from 131,000 in 1933 to 202,000 in 1936, the Young
Socialists from 11,320 in 1934 to 56,640 in 1937, and the CGT union
federation from 785,700 in 1935 to around four million in 1937.212 But by
1938 disillusionment with the record of the Popular Front was having the
opposite effect, and the left parties were beginning to lose members and
support. Thousands of sackings and victimisations after the defeated strike of
late 1938 devastated the parties and the unions, and their memberships sank.213
By the outbreak of the Second World War the following August the French
ruling class was in a powerful enough position to get the same parliament that
had been elected on a wave of exhilaration only three years before to outlaw
the Communist Party and expel its deputies. Nine months later the same
parliament—including the majority of the Socialist Party deputies—voted to
give dictatorial powers to Marshal Pétain, who formed a government
containing French fascists to collaborate with the German Nazis in occupation
of the northern half of the country.
There are still historians, such as Eric Hobsbawm, who invoke the Popular
Front as an example of how the left can withstand an onslaught by the right.
The French experience certainly does not bear this out. The fighting unity
French workers displayed in 1934 certainly threw the far right onto the
defensive. But the attempt to establish unity with a mainstream pro-capitalist
party in 1936 had the same effect as the Social Democrats’ ‘toleration’ policy
in Germany, enabling the right to regain the initiative after a brief lull.
Tragically, this was also to be the experience in the third great example of
resistance to fascism in the 1930s, in Spain.
Spain: fascism, revolution and civil war
English writer George Orwell wrote of Barcelona in November 1936:
It was the first time I had ever been in a town where the working class was in
the saddle. Practically any building of any size had been seized by the workers.
Every shop and cafe had a an inscription saying it was collectivised; even the
bootblacks had been collectivised and their boxes painted red and black.
Waiters and shop-walkers looked you in the face and treated you as equals.
Servile and even ceremonial forms of speech had temporarily disappeared.
There were no private cars; they had all been commandeered.
It was the aspect of the crowds that was the queerest thing of all. In
outward appearance it was a town in which the wealthy classes had practically
ceased to exist.
Above all there was belief in the revolution and the future, a feeling of
having suddenly emerged into an era of equality and freedom. Human beings
were trying to behave as human beings and not as cogs in a capitalist
machine.214
Barely four months earlier Spain’s military, headed by General Franco,
had attempted to seize power. Their efforts had been thwarted in more than half
the country by workers’ uprisings. Civil war followed—the culmination of six
years of increasingly bitter class struggle.
The defeat of the workers’ movement in the early 1920s had allowed a
dictator, Primo de Rivera, to rule Spain for the rest of the decade. He relied on
the military to crush opposition and was able to prevent militant workers
organising. Most anarcho-syndicalist and Communist leaders went into exile.
But de Rivera had no great social base of his own and had to balance between
different social groups, even collaborating with the Socialist trade union
leader Largo Caballero. His weak dictatorship collapsed in 1930, unable to
cope with the effects of the world crisis. A few months later the left won an
overwhelming victory in local elections, the king abdicated, and enthusiastic
crowds proclaimed the republic, first in Barcelona and then in Madrid.
A bourgeois republican government ruled for the next two years, with
Caballero as minister of labour. It was a government which promised much in
the way of reform and delivered little—for example its land reform benefited
only 2,000 peasants out of two million. There was open disillusionment as
police shot down peasants occupying the land in the village of Casas Viejas in
the south and broke strikes in cities like Barcelona.
However, the mere talk of reform was enough to antagonise the upper
classes. A section of bourgeois republicans split away to form an alliance with
a new party, CEDA, backed by the great landowners, certain big business
interests, leading army officers, monarchists, open admirers of Mussolini, and
the bishops of the Catholic church. CEDA leader Gil Robles wanted to graft
fascist methods onto Catholic dogma, as Dollfuss was doing in Austria, and
held rallies reminiscent of those of Mussolini and Hitler. Electoral victory for
the right seemed to put a CEDA government on the cards. Even the leaders of
the Socialist Party and its UGT union saw this as a grave threat, agreed to
oppose it physically, and united with some smaller working class organisations
to form a united ‘Workers’ Alliance’.
The hostility to CEDA came from the industrial workers of the major cities
and the vast numbers of semi-employed rural labourers on the great estates of
the south. But it was also shared by a section of the middle class, especially in
Catalonia, where they feared a right wing onslaught on their autonomous
government and language. Yet when CEDA finally took office in October 1934
only the miners of Asturias in the north of the country rose up, arming
themselves with dynamite and taking control of the area. The anarcho-
syndicalists who dominated much of the working class movement refused to
take part in a national rising out of distrust for all politicians, the Catalan
nationalists stood aside at the last minute, and the Socialist Party and union
leaders restricted protests to a short general strike in Madrid. The government
was able to smash the Asturian miners, using troops from Spanish Morocco
under the command of General Franco, and imposed a reign of terror in the
area. Elsewhere in Spain, Socialist Party members (including Caballero) and
trade unionists were thrown into prison. The left referred to the period that
followed as ‘the two black years’. But the defeat of the workers’ movement in
Spain in 1934 was not like that in Austria the same year. The right wing
government was unable to solve the political crisis and fell apart. Early in
1936 another election was called in a climate of increasing class polarisation
and political bitterness.
In the meantime the same ‘Popular Front’ ideas as in France had come to
influence much of the left. The small Communist Party, which prior to October
1934 had opposed unity with socialists and anarcho-syndicalists, now
campaigned vigorously for all to unite with the bourgeois republicans. Such
ideas were accepted with enthusiasm by the right wing of the Socialist Party,
and a joint list of Socialist, Communist and bourgeois republican candidates
contested the elections. Even the anarcho-syndicalists urged their supporters to
vote for it, hoping to see their activists freed from prison.
The electoral system meant that the Popular Front won an overwhelming
majority of seats on a vote that was only marginally up on 1933. The new
government was composed of the same republican politicians who had so
disappointed people in 1931-33. But pressure from below caused them to free
left wing political prisoners, and there was general elation on the left.
Workers’ confidence led to a growing wave of strikes and demonstrations.
People flooded into both the anarcho-syndicalist CNT and the Socialist UGT
unions, while the Socialist Party moved sharply to the left. Caballero claimed
he had been won to Marxism in prison and declared, ‘The revolution we want
can only be achieved by violence’.215 The Socialist Youth referred to him as
‘the Spanish Lenin’ as they raised their fists and chanted slogans for a
‘workers’ government’ and a ‘red army’.216
There was a growing sense of panic among the country’s conservative
forces. CEDA activists flooded towards an even more overtly fascist
organisation, the Falange, and upper class thugs launched violent attacks on the
left. There were reports that senior army officers were planning a coup, but the
government did nothing except swap their posts around. In just four months 269
people were killed and 1,287 wounded in street fights, 381 buildings were
attacked or damaged, 43 newspaper offices were attacked or ransacked, and
there were 146 bomb attempts.217
The right finally made its move on 17-18 July. The generals tried to seize
control of every city in Spain and Spanish Morocco. The republican
government was too terrified to do anything, and even issued a statement
denying that a coup was taking place. The prime minister, Quiroga, resigned.
His replacement, Barrio, tried to reach an accommodation with the rebellion
and then resigned in the face of hostile workers’ demonstrations.
The military had expected to take power in a matter of hours. The
cowardice and confusion of the Popular Front republican politicians gave them
their chance. What upset their calculations was the reaction of workers. The
UGT and CNT unions called for a general strike. But workers did not simply
engage in passive stoppages. In most of the cities and towns of mainland Spain
they moved to seize control of the barracks and disarm the army. Militants from
the CNT, UGT and workers’ parties grabbed guns from wherever they could.
Sometimes they succeeded in winning over sections of the generally pro-
republican Assault Guard and even, as in Barcelona, the traditionally anti
working class Civil Guard. But what mattered was their initiative. Where they
moved decisively, without vacillation or conciliation towards the right wing
officers, they were nearly always successful.
The coup’s successes were mostly in cities where workers’ leaders
accepted claims by officers to support the republic. In places like Seville,
Cádiz, Saragossa and Oviedo these officers waited until the armed workers
had dispersed before declaring for the coup and shooting down anyone who
resisted.218 Such was the price workers paid for having faith in those sections
of the traditional ruling elite who claimed to be ‘republicans’. It was only
because this faith was not universal that Franco’s forces won control of less
than half of Spain in July 1936 rather than the whole country.
In places where the rising was crushed it was not only Franco’s followers
who suffered defeat: ‘The state, caught between its insurgent army and the
armed masses of the people, had shattered to pieces’.219 Although the official
government still held office in Madrid, real authority in the localities was in
the hands of a multitude of revolutionary committees. The workers who held
power in an area used it in their own interests: factories were taken over and
collectivised; peasants began to divide the land, knowing that the workers’
militias would protect them; armed workers arrested local dignitaries with a
record of hostility to their demands. With the disintegration of the army, the
bourgeoisie seemed finished throughout most of the republican areas, hence the
conditions Orwell found in Barcelona. Effective power was in the hands of the
workers’ organisations, while the official republican government held office
without effective power. This was also true of the autonomous government of
Catalonia, the most important industrial region. Its president, Companys,
invited the leaders of the most powerful workers’ organisation in Catalonia,
the CNT, to a meeting at which he told them:
You are the masters of the town and of Catalonia, because you have defeated
the fascist soldiers on your own…You have won and everything is in your
power. If you do not need me, if you do not want me to be president, say so
now, and I shall become just another soldier in the anti-fascist struggle.220
A situation of ‘dual power’ existed—as in the Russian Revolution of 1917
and at points during the German Revolution of 1918-20—with the official
government dependent on networks of revolutionary committees and
organisations to get things done. However, the republican government did have
one advantage over the revolutionary committees. It had a centralised structure
and they did not. This was a vital matter. The fascist armies were centralised
and so able to pursue a single strategy across the whole country. The anti-
fascists needed to be centralised as well, otherwise the fascists would be able
to win the war simply by moving their troops to points on the front where the
opposing forces were weakest, knowing the anti-fascists would not be able to
respond by concentrating their forces.
This anti-fascist centralisation could have been achieved by drawing the
committees together. There were coordinating committees of anti-fascist
militias in many localities. But there was no establishment of an all-Spanish
committee of militias and workers’ delegates comparable to the Russian
soviets of 1917.
The reason for this failing lay in the politics of the workers’ organisations.
The most powerful, the anarcho-syndicalists, had always insisted that any
centralisation of power would involve a crushing of the workers by a new
state. It would be wrong to follow this path now, they said. In the words of one
of their leaders, Santillan, ‘Dictatorship was the liquidation of libertarian
communism, which could only be achieved by the liberty and spontaneity of the
masses’.221 Rather than go along that path, they argued to leave Companys’s
government intact and collaborate with it. Even the ablest and most militant of
the CNT leaders, Buenaventura Durutti—who had been involved in two
unsuccessful risings against republican governments—did not dispute this
logic. He had played a decisive role in crushing the fascists in Barcelona, was
the hero of the city’s workers, and was to lead an impromptu workers’ army of
tens of thousands which swept across the Catalan border into Aragon and
towards the fascist-held city of Saragossa. But he was not prepared to confront
the question of power, and left his CNT colleagues free to share it with
Companys’s bourgeois government.
The Catalan CNT did create a partial ‘counter-power’ to the government.
It formed a central militia committee made up of representatives from itself,
the UGT union, the Socialist Party, the Communist Party, the dissident
communist POUM party, the Rabassaires peasant organisation and Companys’s
party. This coordinated the military struggle in the region and was the focus for
workers’ aspirations. But as it was made up of parties rather than workers’,
soldiers’ and peasants’ delegates it was an imperfect expression of those
aspirations. And it consciously left decisions over other important questions,
particularly finance and the banks, with Companys’s government.
The Socialist Party and UGT leaders were the main influence on the
workers’ movement in Madrid, and the armed militia owing allegiance to them
was soon as much in control of that city as the CNT was in Barcelona. But for
all the talk of Caballero being the ‘Spanish Lenin’, his supporters made no
moves to establish a structure of workers’ power. The entire history of their
organisation had involved working to exert pressure within the institutions of
existing society. They were terrified of any elected delegate structure which
might allow the anarchists to exert pressure on the rank and file of their own
organisations. The right inside the Socialist Party urged immediate
compromise with the bourgeois republicans. The left, led by Caballero, were
not happy about this, remembering how unsuccessful their past collaborations
with the republicans had been. But the left had no other answer to the question
of how to create a centralised authority to counter the fascist armies’
coordinated pincer movement towards Madrid.
The Communist Party had been founded a decade and a half earlier to
counter the lack of politics of the anarcho-syndicalists and the reformism of the
Socialist Party. But successive expulsions had driven from the party any
leaders who might question the line coming from Stalin in Moscow. And that
line was now to promote a Popular Front with the bourgeois republicans.
While the CNT and the Socialist Party left dithered about what to do about the
government, the Communist Party and the Russian ambassador urged them to
join a coalition government, abjure talk of revolution and restrict themselves to
purely republican anti-fascist policies. They argued this would win the support
of the middle classes, stop other capitalists and landowners going over to the
fascists, and be looked on favourably by the French and British governments. It
would also be able to unite the members of the various militias into a single,
centralised army under the command of those professional officers who had
stuck by the republic.
Such a government was eventually formed at the beginning of September.
Caballero was prime minister, but the majority of its members were
republicans or right wing socialists. Its slogan was, ‘First win the war, then
talk about the revolution.’ It was an approach the CNT leaders could not resist
for much longer than the left Socialists. Soon three of them had joined
Companys’s government in Catalonia, to be followed by four taking ministerial
posts in Madrid.
The left Socialists and anarcho-syndicalists believed that by postponing
completion of the revolution they would be able both to hang on to the gains
workers had already made and win the war by cementing the support of the
moderate republicans. But this was just not possible. What the moderate
republicans wanted most of all was respect for private property and the
maintenance, without any revolutionary tampering, of those sections of the state
machine which remained on the side of the republic. They saw rebuilding the
prestige of the ‘republican’ army officers and police chiefs as their ultimate
protection against social revolution.
However, respect for private property and maintenance of the old state
machine in Spain in the autumn of 1936 did not mean merely restraining
workers from struggle. It meant somehow—by persuasion or force—making
workers surrender the gains they had made and give up control of the factories
and estates they had taken over in July. It meant taking arms away from the
workers who had stormed the barracks in July and handing them back to
officers who had sat on the fence.
The Communist Party functionaries and right wing Socialists argued that
any attempts by workers to make social revolution would mean a second civil
war within the republican side. Yet their efforts to force workers to abandon
their social conquests created precisely the elements of such a civil war.
It was they, not the anarchists or the extreme left POUM, who withdrew
soldiers and arms from the front for internal use. It was they who initiated
fighting when workers refused to leave collectivised property or obey the
orders of the refurbished bourgeois state. It was they who began armed clashes
that cost hundreds of lives in Barcelona in May 1937, when they insisted on
trying to seize the city telephone building that the CNT militia had conquered
from the fascists nine and a half months earlier. And it was they who unleashed
police terror against the left which involved the murder of leaders like Andrés
Nin and the imprisonment of thousands of anti-fascist militants. There was no
other way a militant working class could be forced to abandon its revolution
and wait for ‘the end of the war’.
Yet the sacrifices imposed on workers did not win the war, any more than
those imposed by social democratic governments in Germany, Austria or
France stopped the advance of fascism. Every concession made to the
bourgeois parties in republican Spain played into Franco’s hands.
A typical pattern developed when the republican towns were hard-
pressed. The workers, who had everything to lose by Franco taking the towns,
were prepared to fight to the end. But the propertied middle classes, if they did
not positively welcome the fascist victory, believed they could arrange a
compromise for themselves. Thus when the Basque bourgeoisie abandoned
San Sebastian, it ensured militants belonging to the CNT could not continue the
struggle. It waged a civil war within a civil war, shooting ‘looters’ and
‘incendiaries’ to protect property, and leaving armed guards patrolling the
streets to ensure the city was handed over intact to Franco. The same pattern
was repeated in Bilbao, Santander and Gijon.222 Elsewhere, officers who had
been promoted to positions of command by the government went over to the
fascists at key moments. In the last days of the war a junta of republican
generals seized power in Madrid with the hope of discussing a ‘peaceful
surrender’ with Franco, and 2,000 died in the fighting.
The concessions to bourgeois respectability took their toll in other ways.
Almost the whole of the Spanish fleet had imprisoned its officers and opposed
the fascist uprising in July 1936. This presented a difficult obstacle to Franco,
who was attempting to move the bulk of his army from Morocco to the Spanish
mainland. But, in pursuit of Anglo-French support, the governments of Giral
and Caballero ordered the fleet away from Tangiers and ended its interference
with Franco’s lines of communication. The same reasoning prevented any
attempt to foment rebellion behind Franco’s lines by giving a guarantee of
independence to Morocco. The Spanish army had been battered by anti-
colonial risings in the 1920s and the chances of forging a new struggle were
high. Instead the Popular Front governments preferred to seek Anglo-French
favour by offering those powers concessions in a Spanish-ruled Morocco.
Yet the attempts to placate the Great Powers achieved nothing. Britain and
France refused to supply the republic with arms, even though Germany and
Italy were giving massive backing to Franco.
The search for respectability also meant the republic had little to offer the
small peasants who had misguidedly volunteered to fight for Franco and the
large numbers of workers stranded in his zone, including those in traditionally
militant places such as Seville, Oviedo and Saragossa. One of the most
astonishing features of the war was how little trouble Franco faced from the
populations he had subdued—a marked contrast to what had happened behind
the front lines of the White armies in the Russian civil war.
The most energetic force on the left pushing the anti-revolutionary policy
was the Communist Party. Its core membership did not do this out of a desire to
advance in existing society, even if the party did recruit large numbers of
middle class people who were motivated in this way. The core was made up
of dedicated and courageous people who identified with Russia and accepted
the Stalinist argument that it was ‘impractical’ to push for revolution. So, while
opposing revolutionary demands, they fought with revolutionary enthusiasm in
defence of Madrid in the autumn of 1936, using the language of class to
mobilise workers. But the enthusiasm and the language were still tied to a
policy as fatal as that followed by social democrats elsewhere in Europe. By
crushing the revolution in its stronghold, Barcelona, in May 1937 they also
made it much more difficult to fight fascism. They paid the price when Franco
was able to march unopposed into Barcelona in January 1939 and the
republican generals turned against the Communists in Madrid a few weeks
later.
There are those who question the use of the term ‘fascist’ to describe
Franco’s forces. Even Eric Hobsbawm claims, ‘General Franco cannot…be
described as a fascist.’ They focus on the difference between his ‘movement’
and the Italian fascists and German Nazis. The attempt to create a totalitarian
mass party along fascist lines, the Falange, was only one component, they point
out. The movement also comprised old style monarchists, generals who merely
wanted the kind of coup (pronunciamento) which had been common in the
previous century, conservative landowners, devotees of the church, and the
‘Carlist’ small farmers of Navarre whose ideals harked back to the days of the
Inquisition.
This argument fails because it neglects the process of ‘combined and
uneven development’ explained by Trotsky. Spain in the 1930s was a
backward country with a backward landowning class, a backward capitalist
class, a backward military and a backward church. But it was also an integral
part of the modern capitalist world, with centres of advanced industry and a
powerful, if relatively small, working class capable of using the most up to
date and revolutionary forms of struggle. The archaic ruling class and middle
class reacted by adopting up to date forms of counter-revolutionary struggle. In
1934 this meant attempting to copy the ‘clerico-fascism’ of Dollfuss, and in the
revolutionary year of 1936 it meant a move towards the thoroughgoing fascism
of Mussolini and Hitler. The copy was not exact, moulding together different
traditions and different propertied classes, large and small. But what resulted
was a genuine mass movement capable of doing what no military coup had
done before—not merely defeating the opposition, but destroying the basic
organisational networks of the workers’ movement. The number of people
estimated to have been executed in the wake of Franco’s victory is around half
a million. A greater number went into exile. For more than two decades, no
open expression of liberal, let alone socialist, ideas was possible. Not until
the early 1960s was there a recovery of the workers’ movement. Those who
threw up barricades on 18-19 July 1936 were right to see what they were
fighting as ‘fascism’. The middle class politicians who believed conciliation
was possible, as it had been with past monarchist governments and military
pronunciamentos, were fundamentally mistaken.
Chapter 8
Midnight in the century
Midnight in the Century was the title Victor Serge gave to the novel he
published in 1939. It expressed his feelings about what he had seen happen to
the hopes of his life, and to those of humanity as a whole.
Serge had been imprisoned as an anarchist in France before the First
World War, taken part in the rising workers’ movement in Barcelona, and then
travelled to Russia to put his services at the disposal of the revolutionary
government, working for the Communist International in Germany in 1923. On
returning to Russia he had joined the opposition to Stalinism in the mid-1920s
and as a result spent three years in the early gulag system. He was able to
escape Russia just before the bloodletting of the mid-1930s thanks to the
efforts of left wing intellectuals in France like André Malraux, but left many
friends and comrades behind to face torture and execution. Other friends and
comrades were in the hands of Hitler’s Gestapo and also faced torture and
execution. In Spain Serge’s friend Joaquin Maurin was serving a 20 year
sentence in one of Franco’s jails and another, Andrés Nin, also a member of
the POUM party, was murdered by Stalin’s agents in Barcelona.
Totalitarianism of one sort or another was spreading right across Europe.
Serge was not alone in having to confront this frightful reality. Many
thousands of people who had fought for a better world found themselves
trapped by the machinations of rival states: German Communists were handed
over to the Gestapo by Stalin’s police in 1940; Polish Jews fled eastwards
from advancing German troops in 1939 only to be imprisoned in the Russian
gulag; refugees from Nazi Germany were interned as possible spies in Britain;
soldiers escaping from republican Spain were thrown into concentration
camps in republican France; Russian advisers to the Spanish republic were
executed on their return to Moscow as ‘fascist agents’.
As a living reminder of the revolution of 1917, Leon Trotsky epitomised
everything that governments of every sort hated. He was exiled to Turkey by
Stalin, and expelled from France by a Radical government and from Norway
by a social democratic one. His daughter was driven to commit suicide in
Berlin in the last weeks before the Nazi takeover. One son died in the gulag,
and another was poisoned by a Stalinist agent in Paris. Trotsky himself was to
be murdered by an agent of Stalin in Mexico in 1940. For him the ‘symmetry’
between Nazism and Stalinism was all too plain—the monolithic ruling party,
the show trials, the secret police, the vast concentration camps, and the denial
of any space for independent thought or independent artistic expression.
Yet he dissented from the view, fashionable today, that Stalinism and
Nazism were essentially the same—a view which can easily slide over into a
virtual apology for the Nazis on the grounds that they were ‘no worse’ than
those who fought them on the streets of Germany or Spain.223 The
‘symmetrical’ political structures, Trotsky argued, presided over different
social contents.
He believed the difference lay in the USSR still being somehow a
‘workers’ state’, albeit ‘bureaucratically degenerated’, because industry was
nationalised. This part of his argument did not hold water. If workers did not
control the political structures—and Trotsky rightly insisted they did not—then
they were in no sense the ‘owners’ of industries run by those structures. They
were just as exploited as workers anywhere else in the world. The revolution
of 1917 had been murdered politically and economically.
However, this does not mean he was wrong to insist on a difference
between Stalinism and Nazism. Stalinist state capitalism was constructed by a
new ruling class in a backward country which, desperate to match the
economic and military power of its more advanced rivals, concentrated into a
short period all the horrors of the ‘primitive capital accumulation’ which had
accompanied the rise of capitalism. That is why it enslaved, executed,
imprisoned, deported and starved people. This was the rational core of
Stalin’s paranoia and barbarity.
Nazism, by contrast, was the product of an already mature industrial
capitalism. The German ruling class saw the only way to escape from a deep
economic crisis was to hand political power to a totalitarian movement based
on the irrational fantasies of a middle class driven mad by the crisis. This
process culminated, in the midst of the Second World War, in the ‘Final
Solution’—the use of the most advanced industrial techniques to systematically
wipe out millions of people simply because of their supposed ethnic identity.
Stalin placed millions in labour camps, where about one in ten were worked to
death. Hitler had similar camps, but alongside these—and on an even greater
scale—he set up death camps in which millions were simply gassed. Both
engaged in barbarity, but they were different sorts of barbarity, corresponding
to different stages in capitalist development. Millions suffered under the
national chauvinism and anti-Semitism to which Stalin resorted to bolster his
rule, but the majority survived to talk about it. Few of the millions of Jews and
Gypsies who suffered under Hitler survived. The word ‘genocide’ fits the
second case, not the first.
Of course, this did not make any difference to those who died. But it did
have wider implications, especially for those who supported the rival
ideologies elsewhere in the world. The core of the Nazi movement was made
up of people who enthused at its barbaric features, its racist and genocidal
fantasies, and its worship of ‘blood and honour’. The core of the Stalinist
movements in the West and the Third World was made up of people who tried
to hide from themselves its reliance on totalitarianism and its willingness to
resort to chauvinism and anti-Semitism. They identified with Russia because
they wanted something better than the inhumanity of capitalism and were
convinced that these things existed in Russia.
This point had important practical implications. The various Nazi and
fascist movements which arose in the West and the Third World were
dedicated to breaking working class organisation. By contrast, the Communist
movements tried to combine fighting for workers’ interests—which is what
normally led people to join them—with defending the policy requirements of
the rulers of the USSR. Their leaders tried to balance one against the other.
Again and again this had disastrous consequences and led struggles to defeat—
just as did the behaviour of social democratic leaders. But it was not the same
as the systematic attempt to smash the workers’ movement which characterised
Nazism.
The crisis of the American Dream
For liberals, there did seem one sign of hope in the mid-1930s. This was in the
US. Elections held at the deepest point of the slump, at the end of 1932, had
produced a new Democratic Party Congress and a new president, Franklin D
Roosevelt. These people were certainly not revolutionaries, and were not even
social democratic reformists of the European sort. The Democratic Party had
been the party of the slave-owners and remained a coalition of Southern
segregationist whites, Northern political bosses and certain major capitalists.
But the mood both of US capitalism and the mass of people was one of
desperation at the end of 1932. It was expressed in a feeling that something,
however unorthodox, had to be done to get the economy moving. Congress
even gave serious consideration to a bill to reduce the working week to 30
hours in a desperate attempt to create more jobs. In the end Roosevelt pushed
through emergency powers which involved state controls on the operations of
capitalism. These included guarantees of the funds of banks through the Federal
Reserve system, use of government money to buy up and destroy crops in order
to raise their price, a civil construction corps to provide work camps for 2.3
million unemployed young men, a limited form of self regulation of industry
through cartels to control price and production levels, limited amounts of
direct state production through the Tennessee Valley Authority, and even
measures which made it easier for workers to form unions and raise wages, so
increasing consumer demand. The speed and audacity with which these
measures were implemented caught the enthusiasm of those suffering from the
recession, and of political liberals who wanted an alternative to fascism or
socialist revolution. They seemed to stand in sharp contrast to the previous
administration. Its response to mass unemployment had been to send in 25,000
troops with bayonets fixed, led by General MacArthur on a white charger, to
disperse a protest by unemployed war veterans. At least Roosevelt seemed to
be providing some jobs, even if at rock bottom wage rates and under appalling
conditions.
However, Roosevelt’s measures were neither as innovative nor as
effective as many people thought. Roosevelt remained highly orthodox in one
respect—he did not use government spending to break out of the crisis. In fact
he cut veterans’ pensions and public employment. As Kindelberger writes,
‘Fiscal means to expand employment remained limited, since the Democratic
administration under Roosevelt remained committed to a balanced budget’.224
He also suggests investment was bound to start rising at some point from the
incredibly low level to which it had fallen (from $16 billion in 1929 to $1
billion in 1932), and it began to do so once the level of bank failures had
peaked. In any case, Roosevelt got the credit for a rise in production from 59
percent of the level of the mid-1920s in March 1933 to 100 percent in July, and
a fall in unemployment from 13.7 million in 1933 to 12.4 million in 1934 and
12 million in 1935. Many people believed his ‘New Deal’ had worked
miracles—a myth that remains prevalent today. Yet one person in seven was
still jobless in 1937 when output finally reached the level of eight years
earlier.
Then in August 1937 there was ‘the steepest economic decline in the
history of the US’, which lost ‘half the ground gained by many indexes since
1932’.225 Steel output fell by more than two thirds in four months, cotton textile
output by about 40 percent, and farm prices by a quarter.
The economic recovery had been short-lived. But, combined with a mild
improvement in union rights, it had one very important side-effect. It created a
new feeling of confidence among sections of workers in their ability to fight.
There was an upturn in recruitment to the unions, although workers who struck
still faced vicious attacks from employers and the police. In the first six months
of Roosevelt’s New Deal more than 15 strikers were killed, 200 injured and
hundreds arrested.226 But three strikes in 1934 showed how such confidence
could fuse with the sense of bitterness created by the slump to explode into a
level of militancy not known since the defeat of the steel strike in 1919.
Autolite car component workers at Toledo, teamsters in Minneapolis and
waterfront workers in San Francisco struck in a militant fashion, defied court
injunctions, defended themselves physically against scabs and cops, and won
resounding victories. Furthermore, it was militant socialists who took the lead
in each of these struggles—Trotskyists in Minneapolis, Communists in San
Francisco, and followers of radical ex-preacher A J Muste in Toledo. In the
aftermath of the disputes, trade unionists in the increasingly important auto
industry began to recruit widely and demanded a union based on the industry as
whole to replace the existing craft unions organised along skill lines.
The lesson was not lost on certain mainstream union leaders. They had
been losing members for years—with union membership falling from four
million in 1920 to a little over two million in 1933—and with the decline they
had lost influence within government and ruling class circles. Now some saw a
way to regain influence. Led by the miners’ union leader John L Lewis, a group
of them set up an organising committee, the CIO, aimed at recruiting millions
of mass production workers into industrial unions.
The formation of the new organisation inspired workers in scores of
places to copy the militant methods which had brought the successes of 1934.
Workers at the Goodyear and Firestone rubber plants in Akron, Ohio, sat down
in the plants to stop the management breaking strikes in December 1935 and
January 1936. Mass pickets surrounded the Goodyear plant to stop cops
bringing in strikebreakers.227 There were more than 40 other sit-down strikes
that year. The biggest and most important began in December at the General
Motors (GM) plants in Flint, Michigan. By the end of the strike 140,000 of the
company’s 150,000 workers were either sitting-in or picketing. As in other
strikes at the time, they were threatened with injunctions and had to fight off
attacks by armed police. But in the end the US’s biggest manufacturing
company was forced to recognise the union. As Art Preis, a union activist from
the time, recalled:
The floodgates of class struggle were opened. The cry, ‘Sit-down!’ echoed
from one corner of the land to the other. One month after the end of the GM
strike some 193,000 workers engaged in 247 sit-downs; nearly half a million
took up this weapon before 1937 ended…The sit-downs spread to every kind
of industry and trade…Chrysler auto workers, store saleswomen, Western
Union messengers, restaurant and hotel employees, milliners, bindery workers,
garbage collectors, glass blowers and tyre builders.228
Around 1.8 million workers were involved in strikes, backed up by
support committees, ‘women’s auxiliaries’ which supplied sit-ins with food,
and bands which provided entertainment. Total union membership was over
seven millon by the end of 1937, up five million on four years before.
The strikes had the potential to change the whole culture of US capitalism
by challenging the pervading individualism—the myth of the ‘American
Dream’ that anyone could get ahead—and the racism that was the other side of
this. Where the unions were successful they began to create a new culture of
collective action among workers—summed up by the union song ‘Solidarity
Forever’, sung in the sit-ins—and began to chip away at the racism in cities
like Detroit. The CIO was the only large-scale institution in US society where
blacks had a chance of ‘genuine participation’229 alongside whites.
One central problem prevented the wholesale fulfilment of this potential—
the politics which dominated as the union movement grew. The craft unionism
of the years before 1936 had been ‘non-political’. The great majority of its
leaders accepted US capitalism as the most perfect way of organising society,
and made deals with local politicians of either mainstream party. John L
Lewis, for example, was ‘a Republican in politics, a follower of Adam Smith
in economics and an autocrat in his own union’.230 The new CIO leaders
believed that an alliance with Roosevelt and the Democratic Party was the
way to advance their cause.
Roosevelt liked the idea of the CIO campaigning for him in elections, but
he was not prepared to upset capitalists who also supported him. This was
shown dramatically late in 1937, when Lewis undertook the biggest organising
drive yet—in the steel industry. The CIO appointed 433 full time and part time
organisers, working from 35 regional offices. In the aftermath of the GM strike
many steel companies recognised the steel organising committee as a union,
without much participation by the new union members. But the big firms
refused to do so, and in late May the organising committee called a strike
involving 75,000 workers. The companies responded with all the ferocity they
had shown in the 1919 steel strike. They attacked the picket lines with
‘company thugs, deputies, police and the National Guard…There were 18
strikers slaughtered, scores wounded, hundreds arrested’.231 The organising
committee had not prepared workers for such an onslaught because it had put
its faith in Democratic Party governors and mayors showing sympathy to the
organising drive. It ‘told workers that all the “New Deal” public officials
were “labour’s friends”, and that the strikers should “welcome” the National
Guards, state troopers and police sent to “keep order”.’ 232 The workers were
thoroughly demoralised when these ‘friends’ attacked them with clubs and
bullets. In Pennsylvania the first Democratic governor for 44 years declared
martial law in the steel town of Johnstown. State troopers reopened the factory,
restricting the number of pickets to six, and herded ever-greater numbers of
scabs into the plant. In Youngstown, Ohio, where there was also a Democratic
governor, deputies shot two pickets dead. In Chicago police sent in by the
Democratic mayor killed ten strikers. When CIO leaders looked to Roosevelt
for help he declared, ‘A plague on both your houses’.233 The biggest organising
drive was broken just as the economy began to plunge downwards into
renewed slump.
In the following two years the CIO added just 400,000 members to those
gained in its first 22 months. In 1939 the number of strikes was only half that of
1937. What is more, the union leaders increasingly reverted to collaboration
with the employers and to restricting agitation by the membership. In the auto
union there was an attempt to ban any publication not approved by the
leadership, while there were to be no elections in the newly formed steel union
for five years. The spontaneous grassroots militancy of 1934-36 gave way to
tight control from above.
Many activists tried to resist this trend. But, as in France and Spain, their
efforts were made much more difficult by the behaviour of the Communist
Party. It had played a leading role in the militancy of 1934-37, with many of its
activists taking positions as organisers in the CIO union drive, and by their
courage and daring had attracted large numbers of new recruits. Until 1935 the
Communist Party insisted that Roosevelt was a capitalist politician and the
New Deal a fraud. Then it made a U-turn and welcomed Roosevelt and the
New Deal Democrats with its own version of ‘Popular Front’ politics. The
party worked with the union leaders to spread illusions about the role of these
politicians and to discipline rank and file trade unionists who might disrupt
cosy relations with the Democrats. This continued for the next ten years, except
for a brief interlude during the Hitler-Stalin pact at the beginning of the Second
World War. It helped the union leaders establish bureaucratic control over
most unions—a control which they would use in the 1940s to destroy any
Communist influence.
Such behaviour had important ideological consequences. Writers, artists,
film-makers and musicians had suddenly found themselves in a society which
was shaken to its core by the Wall Street Crash and the slump. All the old
values were thrown into question as the ruling class temporarily lost its sense
of direction and the mass of people, including wide sections of the middle
class, lost their trust in the ruling class. From 1934 onwards a whole set of
new values were thrown up by the strike movement and the upsurge of trade
unionism. The impact was not only on highbrow art and literature, but also on
the mass culture of popular music and the Hollywood dream factory—and just
as they were beginning to exercise global dominance.
This was reflected in the work of writers such as John Dos Passos,
Richard Wright, Ralph Ellison, Dashiell Hammett and John Steinbeck, of film-
makers such as Charlie Chaplin, Joseph Losey, Nicholas Ray, Elia Kazan and
the young Orson Welles, and of musicians like Aaron Copland, Woody Guthrie,
Paul Robeson, Dizzy Gillespie and even the young Frank Sinatra. But with the
New Deal there were openings for such dissident currents to return to the
mainstream. It could provide jobs on federal projects, space in news
magazines and radio shows, and openings in Hollywood. The ‘New Deal’
Democrats saw intellectuals, as it saw the bureaucrats running the new CIO
unions, as a layer that could help impose a new pattern of exploitation on
society as a whole.
Until 1936 much of the intellectual left resisted such temptations, making a
clear distinction between their aims and those of Roosevelt. The stress was on
‘proletarian art’ which, for all its faults in theory and execution, meant trying to
relate to working class struggle and a working class audience. This changed
once the Communist Party began to back Roosevelt. It no longer tried to direct
the spontaneous radicalisation of intellectuals towards the overthrow of
society, but to exerting pressure within society. One aspect of this was the
adoption of the language of ‘Americanism’ traditionally used by the right—the
party’s slogan became ‘Communism is 20th century Americanism’. Another
was encouraging sympathetic writers and film-makers to adopt a moderate
stance so as to advance their careers and gain influence within the Hollywood
studios. This weakened the impulse towards the left of many radicalised
artists. It encouraged them to take the easy option of making concessions to
mainstream Hollywood or Tin Pan Alley.
James T Farrell, one of the ablest novelists of the early 1930s, pointed out:
The New Deal cultural climate which evolved in America during the 1930s,
and which was patently exemplified in many motion pictures, radio plays and
novels of the war period, helped to produce a pseudopopulist literature of the
common man. This neo-populist art and literature emphasises the concept of
Americanism as the means of unifying all races, creeds and classes. Instead of
a literature which penetratingly describes class differences…this literature has
generally stressed and sentimentalised the theme that the common man is
human; it has also used the theme that the rich are Americans too, and that they
are like the common man.234
The Communist Party’s embrace of Roosevelt could also lead to reactions
like that of the black hero of Ralph Ellison’s novel Invisible Man. He becomes
disillusioned with socialism when the party (thinly disguised as ‘The
Brotherhood’) tells him to hold back the struggle of blacks in Harlem because,
‘We are making temporary alliances with other political groups and the
interests of one group of brothers must be sacrificed to that of the whole’.235
The disillusionment of writers such as Ellison and Richard Wright encouraged
many subsequent black activists to think that socialists were just another group
of whites out to use them. Meanwhile, white intellectuals who experienced
disillusionment of their own often came to believe that socialists were as
manipulative as any other political group. Some became cynical enough to flip
over into supporting the anti-Communist witch-hunts of the 1940s and 1950s.
In any case, the growth of an ideological trend which challenged the myth
of the American Dream, just as that dream was beginning to bewitch the world
through popular music and film, was cut short in much the same way as the
growth of the US workers’ movement.
From slump to war
The slump led to tensions between states as well as between classes. The
rulers of each country sought to ease the pressure on themselves at the expense
of their rivals abroad. One after another they tried to expand the sales of
domestically produced goods by devaluing their currencies and raising tariff
barriers. The widespread tendency was towards ‘autarchy’—the production of
as many goods as possible within the boundaries of the national state.
The state was also more involved than ever before (except during the First
World War) in direct economic activities—rationalising some industries by
forcing the closing of inefficient firms, and establishing direct state ownership
of some sectors so as to enhance the prospects of others. Even the
Conservative ‘national’ government in Britain nationalised the electricity
supply, the national airlines and coal mining rights.
In some of the less industrially advanced countries of Latin America and
Europe the process went considerably further. ‘Populist’ governments like that
of Vargas in Brazil and later Peron in Argentina established large state-owned
sectors. A right wing government in Poland laid down a long term economic
plan, and Mussolini in Italy set up state-run companies in an attempt to dampen
the impact of the world economic crisis.
However, there was a contradiction between the use of the state to try and
bolster each national group of capitalists and the desire of all capitalists for
access to resources beyond the narrow boundaries of the individual state. The
only way to reconcile this contradiction was to expand the area which the state
controlled. Formal empires and informal ‘spheres of influence’ became all-
important. The autarchy was that of ‘currency blocks’ dominated by the major
powers—the dollar block, the sterling area, the gold block (centred on France
and its empire), the mark block and the USSR. As the economist Alvin Hansen
pointed out in 1932:
Each country strives to develop spheres of influence where the encroachment
of capitalists of other nations is resented. At times the US has prevented the
European powers collecting their debts in Latin America by naval
blockades…Similarly, the long struggle (not yet terminated) between European
powers over domination of Africa, the Near East and, indirectly, by economic,
financial and military patronage to control the Balkan states, is a record of
international strife and friction that the penetration of foreign capital has
entailed.236
The spheres of influence were not symmetrical. The rulers of Britain,
France, the US and the USSR each controlled vast areas. Germany, the most
powerful industrial power in continental Europe, had no colonies and was
constrained by the narrow borders imposed on it by the other powers in the
Treaty of Versailles at the end of the First World War. The effect of the crisis,
as we have seen, was to swing German big business to campaign vigorously to
break the restraints imposed by Versailles. It wanted to recover German
territory lost to Poland at the end of the war, absorb the German-speaking
Austrian state and Czech border lands (the ‘Sudetenland’) and resume the
drive for hegemony in south east Europe. Hitler’s victory was not only a
victory of capital over workers. It was also a victory for those forces which
wanted to solve the crisis of German capitalism by a policy of military
expansion at the expense of the other Great Powers.
Germany’s major industrial groups agreed, more or less willingly, to
coordinate their efforts and accept increasing central allocation of investment,
state control of foreign trade and state rationing of raw materials. The one
major capitalist who objected strongly, Thyssen—who had been one of the
first to finance Hitler—was expropriated by the Nazi Party and forced to flee
abroad. The others continued a highly profitable collaboration with the Nazis
right through until Germany’s military collapse in 1945.
The establishment of an autarchic economy based on military state
capitalism encouraged, in turn, the drive to armed expansion. The arms
industries needed raw materials and resources. The Nazi regime, with recent
memories of the revolutionary upsurge of 1918-20, was reluctant to pressurise
German workers too much. It extended working hours and intensified
workloads, but it also tried to increase the output of consumer goods so as to
contain the level of discontent among workers and the lower middle classes.237
The only way to obtain the resources it needed was to grab extra territory. The
agricultural output of Austria, the arms industry of the Czech lands, the iron and
steel capacity of Alsace-Lorraine, the coal of Poland and the oil of Romania
could fill the gaps in the German economy—as could workers from these
lands, paid at much lower rates than German workers and often subject to
slave-labour conditions. There was a convergence between the requirements
of big business and Nazi ideology, with its concepts of Lebensraum (‘living
space’) and non-Germans as Untermenschen (‘sub-humans’).
The German approach was matched in east Asia by Japan. It had already
taken Taiwan and Korea as colonies, and controlled substantial concessions in
northern China. In 1931 it reacted to the world economic crisis by seizing the
north Chinese region of Manchuria. Then in the late 1930s the government
formed after a military coup in Tokyo invaded China and began to cast its eye
over bits of the Western empires in south east Asia—the Dutch East Indies, the
British colonies in Malaya, Borneo and Singapore, the French colonies in
Indochina, and the US-run Philippines.
On a smaller scale, Mussolini’s Italy sought to expand its colonial empire
by grabbing Ethiopia to add to Somaliland, Eritrea and Libya, and hoped for an
opportunity to grab Albania and the Adriatic coast of Yugoslavia.
The established imperial powers—Britain, France, Holland, Belgium and
the US—were confused as to how to respond. They had divergent interests:
Britain and France were jostling for hegemony in the Middle East; a section of
the US ruling class was keen to displace Britain as the predominant
international power and had already established a decisive influence in oil-
rich Saudi Arabia; and France was mainly concerned to hold together a
patchwork of allies in Eastern Europe, so as to divert Germany from any
movement against its borders. There were powerful groups in all of them
which regarded Nazism as a positive ally in an international onslaught on
working class organisations and the left. In so far as they saw themselves as
having a foreign enemy it was Russia rather than Germany, Italy or Japan. This
was shown clearly during the Spanish Civil War, when the rulers of the
Western ‘democracies’ were content for Hitler and Mussolini to flout a ‘non-
intervention’ pact, since Franco was no danger to their empires.
Italy was able to take advantage of these feelings when it attacked Ethiopia
in 1935, and Japan did the same when it occupied Manchuria and attacked
China. Then in 1938 it was Hitler’s turn. When he annexed Austria in March,
and then demanded the German-inhabited border areas of Czechoslovakia in
the summer, the dominant sections of the British and French ruling classes did
not see any reason to risk war by opposing him.
Hitler was a racist psychopath, with ambitions to establish an ethnically
‘cleansed’ Germany as the central force in Europe and a dominant world
power. But his strategy in the late 1930s was rational from the point of view of
German capitalism. Pragmatically, he tested the extent to which the other
imperial powers would allow him to expand Germany’s sphere of influence.
He showed the same rationality when he threatened Poland in the summer
of 1939 after secretly agreeing to divide the country with Stalin in the
Molotov-Ribbentrop pact. He knew Germany did not have the resources for an
all-out military campaign lasting more than a couple of months. But he assumed
that Britain and France would not support Poland any more than they had
supported the Czechs. After all, the British government had accepted as
recently as December 1938 that Poland should be a German satellite, and the
British general staff had recognised that Poland could not be defended. Hitler
knew he could conquer the country in a matter of days. He also believed that if
France and Britain did intervene he would be able to defeat France very
quickly, and then both its and Britain’s rulers would come to terms with him if
he promised not to touch their empires.
He was mistaken about one thing. A group had emerged in the British
ruling class around two hardened imperialists, Winston Churchill and Anthony
Eden, which believed German dominance in continental Europe was a threat to
the British Empire. For instance, the old German dream of hegemony extending
through the Balkans towards the Middle East threatened the oilfields and the
Suez Canal connecting Britain to its empire in India. Hitler’s move led others
to begin to share their fears, creating sufficient pressure to bring about a
declaration of war by both Britain and France after the German attack on
Poland, and then, nine months later, prevented the British government accepting
Germany’s conquests in Europe.
Hitler’s other calculations were correct. The French ruling class and an
important section of the British ruling class entered the war reluctantly. They
did nothing to help the Poles—although they did evacuate a section of the
Polish army to serve their own purposes later on. Britain then spent the vital
winter of 1939-40 backing a German-supported Finnish government in a war
against Russia. Germany was able to use this ‘phoney war’ period to prepare
for a Blitzkrieg offensive on France, through Holland and Belgium, with the
aim of defeating its army before Germany’s own limited resources ran out.
Hitler was also right in his expectation of a quick victory against France. A
German attack broke the back of the ‘Allied’ armies in Belgium and northern
France in a fortnight in May 1940, forcing the British army’s evacuation from
Dunkirk at the end of the month, and the German army entered Paris on 14 June.
This victory was the spur Mussolini needed to come into the war on
Germany’s side, and left Hitler in undisputed control of Western and Central
Europe. He was able to bide his time before deciding on his next move, even if
his airforce came off worse in aerial combat over southern England (the Battle
of Britain), so making an invasion of Britain difficult. A year after his victory
over France he decided on a different option—a lightning strike with
overwhelming force against Russia, with the expectation of an easy victory
before the winter.
The nature of the war
Left wing and liberal opinion in Europe and North America saw the war as
one between democracy and fascism. This view was propagated in Britain by
newspapers like the Daily Herald (half-owned by the trade unions), the Daily
Mirror, the Evening Standard (owned by the ardent imperialist Beaverbrook
but soon to be edited for him by the Labour left winger Michael Foot), the left-
liberal News Chronicle and the most popular of the photo magazines, Picture
Post. It is still very much the orthodox view today. So, for instance, Eric
Hobsbawm, in his history of the 20th century, calls it a war ‘between what in
the 19th century would have been called “progress and reaction”.’238
Yet this was not what motivated the leading figures on the Allied side. The
Churchill who demanded a no-holds-barred prosecution of the war was the
same Churchill who had been present during the butchery at Omdurman, sent
troops to shoot down striking miners in 1910, ordered the RAF to use poison
gas against Kurdish rebels in British-ruled Iraq, and praised Mussolini. He had
attacked a Conservative government in the 1930s for granting a minimal
amount of local self government to India, and throughout the war he remained
adamant that no concessions could be made to anti-colonial movements in
Britain’s colonies, although this could have helped the war effort. ‘I have not
become the king’s first minister’, he declared, ‘to oversee the dismemberment
of the British Empire.’ He told Roosevelt and Stalin at Yalta, ‘While there is
life in my body, no transfer of British sovereignty will be permitted’.239
The leader of the second great power to join the ‘anti-fascist’ alliance,
Joseph Stalin, was no more a democrat or a liberal than Churchill. He had
already butchered most of the generation of Bolsheviks who had made the
revolution, and had overseen the horrors of collectivisation, with the famines
in the Ukraine and Kazakhstan. In 1939 he had made the deal with Hitler to
partition Poland and retake control of the Baltic republics, to which the
Bolsheviks had granted independence in 1917. This was no mere diplomatic
buying of time—it involved both handing over to the Gestapo German
Communists who had gone into exile in Russia and supplying Germany with
war materials. Stalin was forced into the war by the German invasion in June
1941, after ignoring warnings of Hitler’s intentions from intelligence agents
and the embassy in Berlin. His response to the terrible defeats of the first
weeks of the invasion was to panic, and then to bolster his position
ideologically by turning back to the Great Russian chauvinism of the period
before 1917. He lauded the Russian generals who had conquered the non-
Russian peoples of the Tsarist Empire, and baptised the war against Hitler
‘The Great Patriotic War’, not ‘The Great Anti-Fascist War’. Many non-
Russian nationalities paid a terrible price for his turn to chauvinism. Stalin
deported whole peoples such as the Crimean Tatars, the Chechens and the
Volga Germans thousands of miles to central and eastern Asia.
The third of the ‘anti-fascist’ leaders was Roosevelt. Before joining the
war the US administration followed a policy of using the opportunity to build
an ‘informal’ US empire to overshadow the formal European empires. As
historian A J P Taylor explains:
In March 1941 Roosevelt instituted lend-lease, perhaps the most dramatic
political stroke of the war. The United States became the ‘arsenal of
democracy’ and did not ask for payment. There was a heavy price to be paid
all the same. The American authorities stripped Great Britain of her gold
reserves and her overseas investments. They restricted her exports, and
American businessmen moved into markets that had hitherto been British.240
Anthony Eden, the British foreign minister, later complained bluntly that
Roosevelt hoped former colonial territories, ‘once free of their masters, would
become politically and economically dependent on the United States’.241
It was a squabble between colonial empires in the Far East that brought the
US directly into the war. Japan was keen to expand its empire at the expense of
other colonial powers, which were immeasurably weakened by the war, and
began to advance south from China into French Indochina. But the US had its
own interests in the region. It controlled the Philippines, and looked upon
Chiang Kai Shek, who was still holding out against Japan in western China, as
favourable to US capital. After an attempt to broker a deal for a division of
influence with Japan fell apart, the US blockaded Japan’s access to
desperately needed raw materials. Japan responded with its attack on the US
fleet in Pearl Harbour, removing the major obstacle to the advance of its forces
south to grab French, Dutch and British colonies in south east Asia.
What motivated many ordinary people to fight against Nazism was very
different to the motives of Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt. There was a
genuine hatred of fascism, especially as sections of the popular media
explained what it was really like, often for the first time. The ‘big three’
leaders could not avoid playing on these popular attitudes. The Churchill wing
of the ruling class was desperate in the summer of 1940. The British army had
lost most of its military equipment, it (mistakenly) expected an invasion that
would be difficult to resist, and a good half of the ruling class was in favour of
an agreement with Hitler on terms which the Churchill wing saw as
humiliating. The only way the group around Churchill could survive politically
was by leaning on the Labour Party and the bureaucracy of the trade union
movement. It brought in Labour’s leader, Clement Attlee, as deputy prime
minister, and the most important trade union leader, Ernest Bevin, to oversee
the labour requirements of the war economy. It could not hold such a
government together without abandoning the imperialist class war rhetoric of
the pre-war Tory party. Instead it spoke of ‘freedom’, ‘democracy’ and ‘the
self determination of nations’. It also had to make a play of sharing out scarce
food supplies through a rationing system (which did lead to an improved diet
for the poorer sections of workers, although the rich could still eat luxuriously)
and promise a massively improved welfare system after the end of the war. As
rising Conservative star Quintin Hogg (later Lord Hailsham) recognised, if the
government did not give people ‘reform’, it risked ‘revolution’.
Similar considerations applied in the US, where the government employed
the language of anti-fascism and anti-imperialism—with Eleanor Roosevelt
fronting all sorts of liberal causes—and Hollywood forgot its pre-war
aversion to anti-Nazi films like Chaplin’s The Great Dictator.
Even in the Soviet Union, the war years saw a certain easing of the terror,
despite the mass deportations of national minorities. In intellectual circles, at
least, there was a brief feeling that the post-war years would be different—a
feeling that comes across, for instance, in Vasily Grossman’s brilliant novel,
Life and Fate, about Stalingrad and Hitler’s death camps.
Nevertheless, the motives of the rulers remained very different from those
of their peoples. This was shown in the conduct of the war. Between the fall of
France in the spring of 1940 and the Allied landings in southern Italy in 1943
most of the fighting by British armies was in northern Africa. Why? Because
Churchill was determined to hang on to the area with the Suez Canal and the
oilfields. His worries were not just about Germany but also the US, as was
shown by a bitter diplomatic tussle between him and Roosevelt over Saudi
Arabia.
The invasion of Italy was itself a consequence of Churchill’s obsession
with re-establishing British hegemony in the Mediterranean. He refused pleas
from both Russia and the US to open a second front in France at the time when
the most vital battles of the war were being fought in western Russia. Instead
he claimed that Italy and the Balkans constituted ‘the soft underbelly of
Europe’—despite mountainous terrain which was bound to mean bloody
battles and a very slow pace of advance.
Churchill’s refusal to concede the principle of independence for India
meant that in 1942, while the decisive Battle of Stalingrad was taking place,
thousands of British-led troops were brutally crushing demonstrations in India
instead of fighting the Nazis, and that an Indian ‘liberation army’ was formed to
fight on the side of Japan. It also led to a famine which killed three million
people in Bengal.
Stalin’s desire to partition part of Eastern Europe with Hitler had led him
to ignore the German threat to the USSR, so his armies were utterly unprepared
when the onslaught came in 1941. The same concern with adding territory to
the Russian sphere of influence led him in 1944 to order Russian troops to
stand back while German troops smashed a rising by the Polish resistance in
Warsaw. Only after the city had been destroyed did Russian troops cross the
Vistula River to take control.
In the same way, the US government dropped its atom bombs on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki in the last days of the war, despite previous signs that the
Japanese government was ready to surrender. This ensured that the surrender
took place before Russian troops, advancing rapidly across Japanese-occupied
Manchuria, could give Russia any real say in what happened in post-war
Japan. Hiroshima and Nagasaki also brought home in the most horrific manner
the US’s capacity to exercise global dominance.
All three powers had made it easier for Hitler to maintain his grip on
Germany. They treated all Germans, not just the Nazis, as the enemy. A senior
British civil servant, Vansittart, drew up plans to destroy all Germany’s
industry and turn it into an impoverished agricultural country. The British and
US air forces followed a policy of carpet-bombing civilian areas, causing huge
firestorms which burned and asphyxiated over 100,000 civilians in places such
as Hamburg, Cologne, and Dresden—a city with no military or strategic
importance. In Russia, propaganda broadcasts by the novelist Ilya Ehrenburg
called on people to ‘kill Germans, kill Germans, kill Germans’. Such an
approach provided no incentive for German workers to turn against their
rulers, and made it easier for Hitler to hold his armies together to the last.
The ultimate barbarity
There is no questioning the barbarity of Germany’s rulers. Their occupation of
Western Europe was brutal, their behaviour in occupied Poland and Russia
barbaric, and their treatment of Europe’s Jews the ultimate horror of the 20th
century. But it is still necessary to understand how this happened.
Nazi policy in Western and much of Eastern Europe was motivated by two
main considerations—to keep control of the occupied countries with as few
troops as possible, and to transport the maximum amount of food and war
materials to Germany. The easiest way to achieve these aims was through
collaborationist local regimes prepared to work under German direction, and
using local police to root out opposition and oversee the dispatch of food and
goods. It was not difficult to achieve, since much of the ruling class across
Europe saw German occupation as a lesser evil compared with revolution or
the destruction of property from continued war. Even those sections which
opposed Germany in principle saw the practical advantages in making profits
by working for them.
Looting the occupied countries enabled German capitalism to exploit the
workforce of most of Europe and maintain both its war expenditures and its
profits. This also enabled it to avoid hitting too hard the workers it feared most
—the German working class which had threatened a revolution in 1918-23
(although German workers could hardly be described as ‘privileged’, since
their living standards fell during the war and they could be conscripted to the
Russian front, where the death toll was horrendous). German capitalism could
rely on the collaborationist politicians and businessmen of the occupied lands
to keep their own workers in order without the need for expensive German
policing—even if their argument had to be, ‘Do this to placate the Germans, or
they will come in and things will be much worse.’ It was a perfect strategy of
divide and rule.
But problems developed over time. The burden of delivering goods to
Germany fell disproportionately on the workers of the occupied countries.
Eventually they could only obtain enough food to provide about half the daily
calories they needed. They grew increasingly resentful, especially since they
also risked being conscripted to work as slave labour in Germany, while their
rulers lived it up with the occupying forces. By the third year of occupation
there were strikes, the flight of workers to remote areas to avoid conscription,
and growing organised resistance. The German response was to supplement
the military occupation authorities, which were not necessarily made up of
committed Nazis, with Nazi organisations such as the Gestapo which showed
no restraint in their use of terror. In countries like France, Slovakia, Croatia
and Hungary, Hitler increasingly relied on local fascist and Nazi groups, which
pursued policies such as deporting Jews with fervour. By playing on local
anti-Semitic traditions the Nazis could divert some people’s bitterness at their
suffering on to scapegoats, and offer Jewish homes and goods as bribes to
local collaborators.
The occupation of Poland followed a different and even nastier pattern.
The Nazi aim was to obliterate the country, integrating the western region of
Silesia into Germany and driving out its non-Germanic population, while
keeping central Poland under military control as a ‘labour reserve’ (eastern
Poland was under Russian rule from 1939-41). This meant liquidating the
traditional leaders of the old Polish state. There were many thousands of
Polish collaborators, but they worked as functionaries under German
superiors. The Nazi police had the power of life and death, and used it. As
Kolko puts it, ‘The Nazi terror in Poland was from its inception overwhelming
and capricious’, with ‘total lack of predictability and imminent dangers in the
cities’.242 Some 5.7 million people (16 percent of the population) lost their
lives. Half of these were Jews, who were herded into overcrowded, starving
ghettos in 1939 and then, from 1942, dispatched to death camps. The ghetto
fitted the capitalist goal of ruling Poland in order to loot it—while Poles (and
later Lithuanians, Byelorussians and Ukrainians) suffered to ensure that
Germany was provisioned with food and labour, pre-war prejudices were
used to divert some of their bitterness onto a Jewish minority which was
suffering even more than them. It followed the old logic of divide and rule. But
it also fitted the murderous racist mythology of the Nazi Party. The German
occupying forces were told they were the Aryan elect, the Poles were
Untermenschen, and the Jews were the lowest of the low, an alien group
which had to be expunged from Europe.
The German attack on Russia—codenamed Barbarossa—in the summer of
1941 raised the horror to a higher degree. The advancing German forces set
out to destroy the structure of the enemy state as they had in Poland, but on a
much greater scale and over a much greater area. This was to be accomplished
by SS units operating behind the front, killing all Communist commissars and
‘Jewish-Bolshevik elements’. For the first time mass murder became an
integral part of the war effort. But it was still mass murder with an allegedly
military function—to stop pro-Russian forces regrouping to engage in guerrilla
warfare and sabotage. So at first the Jews who were killed were males of
fighting age.
The German army did not succeed in reaching Moscow and conquering
Russia in the way Hitler had expected. It became stranded on the icy wastes of
the central European plain, and thereafter faced the biggest and bloodiest
battles in world history at Stalingrad and Kursk. The original Barbarossa army
numbered three million. By 1945 German casualties on the Eastern Front
totalled six million, and the total number of Russian dead reached 13 million
soldiers and seven million civilians.243
German troops faced conditions which their commanders had never
planned for. The war involved unbelievable brutality, and the brutalised
soldiers were prepared to tolerate, if not join in, the mass murder of Russian
and Jewish civilians, with the excuse that they might provide support for
resistance activities. Capitalist war had created the context in which such
events could occur, and they remained rational by its monstrous standards. It
enabled the Nazi leadership to implement a policy which was not rational even
in these terms—the attempt to exterminate all of Europe’s Jewish and Roma
Gypsy population in secret. Special SS Einsatzgruppen detachments began to
kill Jewish women and chidren as well as men—notably at the Babi Yar gorge
near Kiev, where they massacred 43,000 in September 1941, while German
generals still expected a quick victory. The project was formalised at the
Wannsee Conference in January 1942, which brought together 14 key figures
from the hierarchies of the Nazi Party and the state. They set in motion
elaborate mechanisms for identifying every single person of Jewish descent in
German-controlled Europe—some five or six million—detaining them in
batches, transporting them hundreds of miles to special camps under the guise
of ‘resettlement’, persuading them to enter special buildings where they were
gassed, and then disposing of their bodies as if this were all part of an
industrial assembly line.
In terms of the economic or war needs of German capitalism, none of it
made sense. Many of those murdered were skilled workers or members of
professions who could have contributed to profit-making or the war economy.
Instead, when their labour was used before they were killed, it was as slave
labourers performing tasks ill-suited to their skills. The movement of millions
of people from one end of Europe to another clogged up railway lines and used
rolling stock that was desperately needed for troops, weapons and industrial
components. Bureaucratic personnel who could have been much more fruitfully
employed were involved in planning the operation. Yet it continued, day after
day, week after week, right up to the end of the war.
It did not even make sense in crude ideological terms, as a way of
diverting the bitterness of the mass of German people towards scapegoats. For
the mass of German people were not told about it. It was a secret operation.
Thousands of people must have known some details of the Holocaust. Many
more suspected something unpleasant was happening and deliberately turned
their thoughts away from it.244 But that did not make it a means for winning
mass support for the regime.
This is hardly surprising. The Nazi leaders had discovered over the years
that although they could take advantage of the widespread anti-Semitism which
existed in German society, there were also limits to this. For example, when
they unleashed SA Stormtrooper violence against Jewish shops and businesses
on Kristallnacht in November 1938 they found it provoked popular hostility.
Many people who were prepared to blame Jews in general for the world’s
problems were not happy to see individuals they knew suffer. Diffuse anti-
Semitism existed alongside, and in competition with, a range of other ideas
which challenged it. That was why Social Democrat and Communist leaders
from a Jewish background (from Karl Marx to Rosa Luxemburg) had been able
to gain the allegiance of very large numbers of German workers—although
some of these workers would have been influenced by anti-Semitic traditions
and propaganda. It is also why an examination of Nazi propaganda in the last
years of the Weimar Republic shows that Hitler could not rely on anti-
Semitism alone, and on occasions had to tone it down in order to gain support.
Even after the Nazis had taken power and suppressed the expression of views
which openly challenged anti-Semitism, they found they got a better reception
by focusing on falling unemployment, revoking the Treaty of Versailles and
building Hitler’s image as an international figure.
Where anti-Semitism was crucially important was in holding together and
motivating the inner core of the Nazi Party, the SA and the SS, and stopping
them relapsing into passivity, conservatism and inertia. It was this irrational
ideology that motivated them to risk confronting the forces of the left in the
Weimar period, and to implement Hitler’s orders once the Third Reich was
established. For them, Jews were the ultimate enemy behind every mishap
Germany had suffered. Elimination of the Jews was seen as the only way to
safeguard conquered territory as the German army advanced eastward. And
even when defeat was close at hand, in late 1944 and in early 1945, killing off
the Jews could seem like a victory.
The German ruling class had needed people with such deranged views to
deal with the crisis in the early 1930s. Their derangement provided it with a
force which could conquer working class organisations and then sustain its
drive towards European supremacy. In return, the Nazis were allowed to act
out their deranged fantasies by exterminating over six million Jews, Gypsies
and disabled people. Major firms—Krupps, I G Farben and others—were
happy to help in the organisation of the death camps, using slave labour from
them, even if the extermination programme made no sense in economic terms.
Nazism was the grisly fulfilment of Rosa Luxemburg’s prophesy—that the
alternative to socialism is barbarism.
Hope reborn
A young captain in the British army, Denis Healey, could tell the 1945 Labour
Party conference that he had just returned from parts of Europe where
‘socialist revolution’ was under way:
The upper classes in every country are selfish, depraved, dissolute and
decadent. These upper classes are looking to the British army and the British
people to protect them against the just wrath of the people who have been
fighting underground against them for the past four years. We must see that this
does not happen.245
The war had not simply led to horror and despair. It had produced a
reaction among those who had been defeated and demoralised in the inter-war
years. Resistance movements had emerged which seemed to be a foretaste of
revolutionary change in much of Europe.
Greece had suffered more than any other country in the war apart from
Poland and Russia. Italian and then German occupation had led to the deaths of
one in ten people—half of them from starvation.246 Resistance groups emerged
spontaneously at first but were pulled together into a loose national
organisation, EAM-ELAS, which exercised increasingly effective control over
rural areas, threatened the German army’s lines of communication and tied
down thousands of German troops. When the German army prepared to
withdraw north in late 1944 the liberation movement seemed destined to take
control of the country. A right wing dictatorship sustained by the monarchy had
followed a pro-Nazi policy until the Italian invasion in 1940. The major forces
of the resistance wanted an end to the monarchy and the old ruling class, and
were happy to see the Greek Communist Party play a central role within EAM-
ELAS.
In Italy the industrialists and landowners had helped put Mussolini in
power in the 1920s and were happy with his regime until the summer of 1943,
when the Italian army suffered serious defeats and they lost their overseas
empire. For almost two decades the only underground opposition had come
from scattered groups of Communists, and to a lesser extent Socialist Party
supporters, who had attempted to maintain some sort of national organisation.
Ignazio Silone’s novel Bread and Wine, about the desperate attempts of an
underground socialist to establish a network of contacts, gives a sense of the
harshness of those years. The first overt resistance came in March 1943 when
a wave of strikes began in Turin and spread, despite arrests, across northern
Italy, involving 100,000 workers. The immediate cause was the immense
hardship from soaring prices and the effects of bombing. But a small number of
Communist militants with memories of the struggles of 1918-20 were in the
forefront of the agitation. Mussolini told fascist leaders that the strike had set
his movement back 20 years, and Hitler asked how such disobedience could be
permitted.247 In fact the strikes showed that the war was creating such a social
crisis, as it impoverished great swathes of the lower and middle classes, that
repression alone could not sustain the regime for long.
By the time US and British troops landed in Sicily early in July and began,
very slowly, to push north, most of the upper class were worried that the crisis
of the regime might engulf them as well. The only way to keep their power,
they thought, was to ditch Mussolini and come to terms with Britain and the
US. Their attitude was shared by Mussolini’s closest collaborators in the
Fascist Grand Council. At a special meeting a fortnight after the landings it
voted for Mussolini to surrender power. The next day the same king who had
handed power to Mussolini in 1922 replaced him with General Badoglio, the
commander of the Italian troops in the rape of Ethiopia in 1935, and put
Mussolini under house arrest.
People poured onto the streets of Rome, overjoyed that the nightmare of
fascism was over. Their joy was premature. The Badoglio government
maintained its alliance with Germany for another month while it undertook
secret negotiations with the Allies. In the meantime, it used force to crush
demonstrations, shooting 23 people dead in a Bari square. Its behaviour gave
the German army time to pour troops into Italy. When Badoglio finally
announced an agreement with the Allies, Germany was able to occupy the
country north of Naples and force his government to flee Rome. German
paratroops rescued Mussolini and set up a puppet government (known as ‘the
Republic of Salo’) in northern Italy.
The German occupation provoked the growth of a massive resistance
movement. It had three components. There were groups of armed partisans in
the countryside—9,000 at the end of 1943, more than 20,000 by the spring of
1944, and 100,000 a year later. There were underground armed ‘patriotic
groups’ in the cities, which assassinated officials and blew up German troops.
And there was a growing movement of resistance in the factories, with a major
strike in Genoa after the shooting of political prisoners in January 1944 and a
strike by 300,000 in Milan in March which spread to the Veneto, Bologna and
Florence. Lower paid and women workers were in the forefront of these
strikes, to which the German forces responded with arrests and mass
deportations.
The three strands came together in August 1944, when the resistance seized
most of Florence from the German army before the Allies arrived. They came
together again spectacularly eight months later to take control of the country’s
three major industrial cities—Genoa, Turin and Milan. In Genoa a rising led
by the armed urban groups seized the city’s public buildings, surrounded the
German troops, captured a barracks and then, aided by partisans from the
countryside, forced the surrender of the German general and 15,000 troops. In
Turin:
The city population and the factory workers in particular had to assume the full
brunt of the fighting…The battle raged around the factories occupied by the
workers—Lancia, Spa, Grandi Motori, Fiat Mirafiori, Ferriere and many
others. The workers resisted with determination…[until the armed urban
groups] counter-attacked, mopping up the remnants of the fascist forces.248
In Milan the armed groups stormed the fascist barracks. There was fighting
around the major factories, especially Pirelli, and then the armed groups, the
partisans and the workers took over the city, moving in from the outskirts.
The first resistance groups had often arisen spontaneously, their growth
fuelled by the brutality of the German occupation and the hardship which
followed it. Many young men took to the mountains to escape conscription or
avoid forced labour in Germany. But the sheer fact of resistance drove them to
left wing politics. Everyone in Italy knew that the ruling class had backed
Mussolini. Everyone knew that the industrialists were collaborating, to a
greater or lesser extent, with the German occupation. And everyone had
witnessed the failure of the king and Badoglio to do anything to prevent the
German occupation in the summer of 1943.
There was a near-unanimous feeling among those who chose to fight back
that Italian society had to undergo fundamental change. This was common to
the forces which dominated the resistance politically. The Communist Party
grew from 5,000 members in June 1943 to 410,000 in March 1945, attracting
vast numbers of people who knew little detail of the party’s ‘line’, but wanted
revolutionary change in Italy and identified with the success of the Russian
armies after Stalingrad. Alongside it was the old Socialist Party—smaller, less
well organised and still containing groups of timid reformists but, as in 1918-
20, using revolutionary language. Finally, there was the ‘Party of Action’, led
by members of the middle class and with a heterogeneous membership, but
insistent that there had to be a radical break with the past. It was hardly
surprising that Winston Churchill was worried about ‘rampant Bolshevism’,
and saw the king and Badoglio as the sole barriers against it.249
France differed from Greece and Italy in one respect. The first call to build
underground resistance had not come from the left, for the majority of Socialist
Party MPs had voted for the Pétain government, and the Communist Party—
following orders from Moscow during the period of the Hitler-Stalin pact—
opposed resistance until the summer of 1941. The call came from a
representative of the old ruling class, a middle-ranking army officer, Charles
de Gaulle, who had escaped to Britain. But de Gaulle’s British-based ‘Free
French’ forces were small, and the US would not recognise him, trying right
through to the end of 1943 to do a deal with the pro-German Vichy government.
Once Germany had invaded Russia, the Communist Party set up its own
resistance organisation, the FTP. It soon outgrew the Gaullists, since resistance
had a class character for most people. The old ruling class had half-welcomed
the German forces in 1940 and was collaborating wholeheartedly with them.
As in Greece and Italy, it was the lower classes who bore the suffering of the
occupation. Some 88 percent of those arrested in the Pas-de-Calais and Nord
were from working class backgrounds. While railway workers made up only 1
percent of Brittany’s population, they provided 7 percent of its resistance
members. When the resistance seized Paris from the German army in advance
of the Allies in 1944, everyone knew that the key controlling force was the
Communist Party. The only question—as in Greece and Italy—was whether it
was going to use its position to push for revolutionary change or do a deal with
de Gaulle to keep capitalism going.
Hope strangled again
In a famous passage, Winston Churchill recalled how he met Stalin in Moscow
in October 1944 and said to him, ‘So far as Britain and Russia are concerned,
how would it do for you to have 90 percent predominance in Romania, for us
to have 90 percent in Greece and go 50-50 about Yugoslavia?’
Churchill wrote down a list of countries with the appropriate percentages
next to them, and Stalin wrote a large tick on it.
At length I said, ‘Might it not be thought rather cynical if it seemed we had
disposed of these issues, so fateful to millions of people, in such an offhand
manner? Let us burn the paper.’ ‘No, you keep it,’ said Stalin.250
It was not the resistance fighters in Greece, Italy and France who decided
Europe’s destiny, but meetings such as this. At conferences in Tehran, Yalta and
Potsdam, Stalin agreed with Churchill and Roosevelt to divide Europe into
spheres of influence. The US was not happy with this division at first. It hoped
to use its massive industrial superiority to transform the whole world into a
single US sphere of influence, free trade providing it with open markets
everywhere.251 Churchill, committed as ever to maintaining an empire run
exclusively from London, would not countenance this, and neither would
Stalin, who had the sheer size of Russia’s army to counter US economic power.
Between them they persuaded Roosevelt to accept the division they wanted.
The deals were a death blow to the hopes of the resistance movements.
They gave Stalin’s armies a free hand in Eastern Europe. Stalin was not going
to let Communists elsewhere upset the arrangement by attempting to lead
revolutions, however favourable the mass of people might be. His former
foreign minister Litvinov spelt it out bluntly to US representatives in Italy in
September 1944: ‘We do not want revolutions in the West’.252
This was not just a matter of words. In the spring of 1944 the Italian
Communist leader Togliatti had returned to Italy from Moscow. He announced
that his party was joining the despised Badoglio government and was prepared
to leave the monarchy untouched until the war was over.253 The French leader,
Maurice Thorez, insisted from Moscow that the biggest resistance group, the
Communist-led FTP, should integrate into and accept the leadership of de
Gaulle’s smaller FFI. After his return to Paris in January 1945, Thorez called
for militants to abandon all resistance to the institutions of the old state. He
insisted that there had to be ‘one state, one army, one police’.254
In Italy and France the restoration of the old order occurred more or less
peacefully. In Greece the eventual outcome was civil war, although this did not
result from any serious attempt by the resistance leaders to carry through
revolutionary change.
The retreat of the German army at the end of 1944 left EAM-ELAS in
control of virtually the whole country. It would have required minimal
movement on the part of its forces to occupy Athens. It knew that Britain’s
intention was to impose the old monarchy and a government run by politicians
from the old discredited ruling class. Britain had already used force to break
an attempted mutiny against this arrangement by thousands of exiled Greek
troops in Egypt. Yet it allowed British troops and the new government to take
over the city.255 The only forces the government could rely on were the police
and right wing groups, which had collaborated with the Nazis and were intent
on humiliating the resistance. Early in December the government demanded the
immediate disarming of the resistance throughout the country, and its forces
opened fire with machine-guns on a huge protest in Athens, killing 28 and
wounding many others.256 EAM-ELAS had no choice but to fight back, and the
British generals found themselves hard-pressed. Field Marshal Alexander
warned Churchill that he would not be able to reconquer more than the Athens-
Piraeus area.
Churchill had already told Anthony Eden, ‘I hope the Greek brigade will
not hesitate to shoot when possible,’ and he ordered the British commander on
the spot, Scobie, ‘Do not hesitate to act as if you were in a conquered city
where a local rebellion is in process’.257 At this point Churchill flew to Athens
to announce that the British operation had ‘the full approval of President
Roosevelt and Marshal Stalin’.258 The EAM-ELAS forces withdrew from the
capital, and formally disbanded a month later in return for an agreement which
the government had no intention of keeping. On 8 March Stalin told Churchill
at Yalta, ‘I have every confidence in British policy in Greece’.259
Soon government forces were hunting down anyone who had been part of
the resistance. At least 50,000 EAM-ELAS supporters were imprisoned and
interned during 1945, while right wing paramilitary groups operated with
government protection. C M Woodhouse, a British representative who was to
become a Tory member of parliament, later wrote, ‘Up to the end of 1945…the
blame for bloodshed lay primarily on right wing forces’.260
Many historians argue even today that the leaders of the resistance
organisations in all three countries had no choice but to accept the restoration
of the pre-war ruling classes. If they had tried to overthrow these, it is argued,
they would have been crushed by the might of the British and US armies. Paul
Ginsborg accepts this in the case of Italy, and Eric Hobsbawn insists more
generally, ‘The Communists…were in no position anywhere west of Trieste…
to establish revolutionary regimes’.261 Yet as Gabriel Kolko rightly argues,
such judgements ‘entirely disregard the larger context of the war with
Germany, the purely military problems involved, as well as the formidable
political difficulties that sustained counter-revolutionary wars would have
encountered in England and the US’.262
The popular mood in Britain and the US in 1944-45 was not such that it
would have been easy for them to mount massive repression. The British
actions in Greece caused major political storms both in Britain and the US, and
there was massive desire in the ranks of their armies to return home as soon as
possible—a mood which was to find expression in mutinies among British
forces stationed in Egypt. Above all, it is highly unlikely that a revolutionary
movement would have been confined to a single country. Churchill’s great fear
was that revolution in Greece would inspire moves in the same direction in
Italy—and if that had happened it is hard to imagine France would not have
been affected. Indeed, even in Germany, the collapse of the Nazi regime in
May 1945 saw workers flocking to their old socialist and Communist
allegiances, setting up popular anti-Nazi committees and taking over the
running of factories from which pro-Nazi managers had fled—until the
occupation armies restored ‘order’ with the help of politicians who had
returned from exile with them.
The re-establishment of the old order in Greece, Italy and France meant
that those who had prospered under the fascist and collaborationist regimes
were soon back to their old ways. In Greece the ‘truce’ between the
government and the resistance fighters was soon forgotten. Fascist
sympathisers and former collaborators were to be found at every level of the
army and police, and they began systematic persecution of the left until open
civil war broke out. US arms ensured that the right won the civil war,
governing via rigged elections through the 1950s and early 1960s. Then, in
1967, the fascist sympathisers and former collaborators in the army seized
power through a military coup rather than risk an electoral victory by left of
centre politicians. Not until after the military regime collapsed in the mid-
1970s did anything like a normal capitalist democracy exist in Greece.
In Italy genuine parliamentary institutions were established, but beneath
them the composition of the state machine remained very much as before. This
was shown vividly in the early 1970s, when sections of the secret services and
the armed forces worked with fascists to plant bombs in the hope of providing
a pretext for a coup.
In France the continuity of the state machine was exposed in the mid-1990s
by the trial of the former Vichy police chief in Bordeaux, Papon, for deporting
thousands of Jews to the death camps. After the war he had been able to rise to
the position of police chief in Paris and order a police attack on an Algerian
demonstration which killed more than 100. However, the real horror to arise
from the continuity of the French state came outside France. On VE Day
(marking the defeat of Germany), Arabs took to the streets of Setif in Algeria
waving the green and white flag of resistance to French rule. French police
opened fire, and in the subsequent fighting at least 500 Algerians and 100
French settlers were killed.263 The French state’s determination to keep the
colony was to cost a million lives over the next 20 years. In Vietnam the
Communist-led nationalist resistance movement, the Vietminh, had taken
control of the country when Japan surrendered. British troops commanded by
Lord Mountbatten landed in the southern city of Saigon, armed Japanese
prisoners of war and used them to disarm the Vietminh, and then handed the
city to the French colonial authorities. After a brief lull, during which the
Communists tried to implement Stalin’s general line by cooperating with the
French, a war broke out which was to last for almost 30 years and cost more
than two million Vietnamese lives.
The fate of the liberation movements in western and southern Europe was
matched by what happened in the Russian sphere of influence in eastern
Europe. The Western powers agreed to incorporate eastern Poland into the
USSR as ‘Western Ukraine’, stood back while Stalin allowed the German army
to crush the Warsaw Rising, and then accepted the ‘people’s government’ he
appointed as rulers of the country. In the same way they allowed him a free
hand in Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and East Germany. They
made plenty of propaganda about the ills that Stalin inflicted on these
countries, just as Stalin made propaganda about the crimes of the West, but they
did nothing to stop him having his way. Both sides kept to the main points of
their wartime agreements until 1989, when the Russian bloc collapsed from its
own internal difficulties.
There was one important country in Europe which did not fall into either
camp. This was Yugoslavia, where the Communists led by Tito (himself of
mixed Croat and Slovenian ancestry) had succeeded in building a multi-ethnic
resistance movement against both the German occupation and the Croat
Ustashe fascists—and had obtained arms from the Allies because of its
willingness to fight the Germans while the royalist Serb Chetniks refused to do
so. The partisans were able to take control of the country and set up a regime
which—although it initially slavishly copied Stalin’s regime in the USSR—
had a strong independent base of its own. This was demonstrated in 1948 when
Tito suddenly broke with Stalin to follow a policy of neutrality which lasted
for the next 40 years.
The agreements between the Western powers and Russia were not confined
to Europe. Britain and Russia had divided Iran into two spheres of influence
during the war and maintained their forces there for a couple of years. The
Russian and US division of Korea in the summer of 1945 was more permanent
—along a line drawn by the US’s General MacArthur. Each picked a dictator
to rule its half: on one side a small-scale guerrilla leader, Kim Il Sung, who
had spent the war in the USSR; on the other, right wing nationalist Syngman
Rhee, who could be relied upon to do what the US wanted. The division of
Korea was the last great act of cooperation between the wartime allies. Within
five years it was to be the cause of the biggest collision between them.
Chapter 9
The Cold War
The ‘Big Three’ powers celebrated their victory over Germany and Japan by
establishing a new international organisation, the United Nations. Its founding
conference in San Francisco in May 1945 promised the peoples of the world a
new order of peace and cooperation which would vanquish war forever. It was
claimed that this was going to be very different from its inter-war predecessor,
the League of Nations, which had not been able to do anything to stop the
Second World War. The claim struck a chord among people who had suffered
and fought for what they genuinely thought was going to be a better world.
However, the ‘failure’ of the League of Nations had not been accidental—
it followed from an intrinsic fault. It was set up by the victorious powers after
1918 as part of the Treaty of Versailles by which they parcelled out the world
among themselves. Lenin described it as a ‘thieves’ kitchen’—and, as the
saying goes, ‘thieves fall out’. The United Nations was no different, even if it
had a ‘soup kitchen’ annexe in Geneva (comprising the children’s fund
UNICEF, the World Health Organisation, and so on). Decision-making lay with
four permanent Security Council members264—Britain, the US, France and
Russia—and between them these dominated, oppressed and exploited the rest
of the world.
They were already falling out behind the scenes by the time of San
Francisco. Churchill discussed drawing up plans for the ‘elimination of
Russia’, arming defeated German troops for a surprise attack ‘to impose on
Russia the will of the United States and the British Empire’265—a suggestion
which, it seems, his own generals would not take seriously. The US did more
than just talk: its decision to use the nuclear bomb against Japan in August
1945 was clearly motivated, at least in part, by a desire to show Stalin the
enormity of the destructive power at its disposal.
Tension festered below the surface for more than a year, while each of the
powers consolidated its position—reorganising industry now the war was
over, overseeing the parts of the world it had recently occupied, and
dampening domestic expectations. Britain’s Labour government sought to
placate the wave of radicalism of 1945 with plans to improve welfare
provision and nationalise the railways and mines. The US experienced a level
of strikes even higher than in 1936-37. The Russian occupying forces in
Eastern Europe oversaw the transformation of what had been small Communist
parties into mass bureaucratic organisations.
The rulers of each needed a sense of international harmony as a cover for
consolidating structures of control. In France, Italy and even Britain,
governments still benefited from Communist Party opposition to strikes. In
Eastern Europe it suited Stalin that the states occupied by Russian troops
should be run by coalition governments involving figures from the pre-war
right, centre and social democratic parties.
The quarrels between the powers became public in 1946-47. Churchill,
now in opposition in Britain, opened fire with his speech in Fulton, Missouri,
in March 1946, declaring, ‘From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic,
an iron curtain has descended on the continent.’ Of course, he did not mention
his own role in bringing this about through his cynical deal with Stalin in
Moscow only 18 months before. Nor did he see any contradiction in repeating
his declamation about ‘freedom’ and ‘democracy’ two days later in the
segregated Jim Crow state of Virginia. A year later Truman translated
Churchill’s words into action, taking over from Britain the role of sustaining
the repressive regime in Greece which had been responsible for the
assassination of 1,300 EAM-ELAS supporters in the previous year.
The Marshall Plan, the scheme to revive the economies of Europe under
US hegemony, soon followed. It was presented as an offer of aid to all of
Europe, including those areas under Russian occupation. But W W Rostow, an
economist who worked on implementing it—and who later played a key role in
the US’s war against Vietnam—reveals that the plan was part of an ‘offensive’
which aimed ‘to strengthen the area still outside Stalin’s grasp’.266 Within
weeks of the announcement of the plan, and prompted by the US, the parties of
the right and centre had forced the Communists out of the governments in
France and Italy.267 This was Thorez and Togliatti’s reward for their three
years of work opposing strikes (including a major strike at Renault in Paris at
precisely the time the government crisis erupted). In the spring of 1948 the US
poured funds into Italy to try and prevent a joint list of Communist and
Socialist candidates winning the general election—and began to recruit ex-
fascists to an armed underground organisation, Gladio (later to come under
NATO’s wing), in case they did win.
Stalin was taking similar measures to clamp down on potential dissent in
Russian-occupied Eastern Europe. The Russian army had ensured the police
and secret police were in the hands of its appointees. Now a series of moves
were used to destroy resistance to Russian dictates. First, non-Communist
ministers were forced out of office; the social democratic parties were forced
to merge with Communist parties regardless of the feelings of their members;
then Communist Party leaders who might show any degree of independence
from Stalin (including virtually anyone who had fought in Spain) were put on
trial, imprisoned and often executed. Kostov in Bulgaria, Rajk in Hungary, and
Slansky in Czechoslovakia were all executed. Gomulka in Poland and Kadar in
Hungary were merely thrown into prison. Stalin was not only keen to remove
pro-Western supporters of market capitalism. He was terrified of independent
Communist-led regimes emerging—especially after the break with Tito’s
Yugoslavia in 1948. A wave of show trials of Eastern European Communist
leaders followed, accused, like Tito, of being ‘imperialist agents’ and
‘fascists’.
The most visible expression of what soon became known as the ‘Cold
War’ came in the summer of 1948. Germany had been divided into four
occupation zones, and so had its capital, Berlin. Now the US, Britain and
France merged their zones and introduced a new currency, which had the effect
of cutting them off from the Russian zone. Russia reacted by imposing a
blockade on the movement of goods and food by road and rail to West Berlin,
which was an isolated enclave in the midst of their zone. A huge US and
British airlift succeeded in keeping the supplies flowing—and became part of
an Anglo-US propaganda campaign about the ‘defence of freedom’.
The campaign provided the background for a campaign against Communist
and left wing activists in the West. In the US the Taft Hartley law required
trade unions to purge Communist officials; government employees (including
teachers and college lecturers) were sacked for refusing to sign ‘loyalty oaths’
and directors and writers who would not denounce alleged ‘Communist’
contacts were banned from working in Hollywood by Senator Joe McCarthy’s
House Un-American Activities Committee. Writer Dashiell Hammett was
among the many alleged Communists imprisoned. Charlie Chaplin was banned
from entering the country, and Paul Robeson from leaving it. In a grisly climax,
Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were sent to the electric chair for allegedly passing
atomic secrets to Russia. In France and Italy anti-Communist splits tore the
trade union movement apart. In Britain several major unions banned
Communists from holding office.
While this was happening in the West, the most sterile form of Stalinist
ideology was imposed in Eastern Europe, with prisons and labour camps for
anyone who objected.
The two blocs were quickly organised into rival military alliances, NATO
and the Warsaw Pact, and to a large extent cut off from one other economically.
The US banned a massive range of ‘strategic’ exports to the Eastern bloc,
while within it Russia insisted on ‘the unreserved subordination of politics,
economics and ideological activity to the needs of the bloc as a whole’.268
Military expenditure on both sides leapt to heights unprecedented in
peacetime, reaching about 20 percent of US national output and up to 40
percent of Russia’s smaller output. Russia built secret cities to develop an
atom bomb to rival the US, while the US developed the H-bomb—100 times
more destructive than the atom bomb—and maintained a fleet of armed nuclear
bombers permanently in flight. It was not long before the combined arsenals of
the two superpowers were enough to destroy the world many times over. Yet
generals on both sides played war games which assumed the use of these
weapons.
As ideological conformity was imposed on either side of the ‘iron curtain’,
a generation grew up under the shadow of ‘the bomb’. Anyone in either camp
who dared to oppose this monstrosity could expect to be labelled a supporter
—or even an ‘agent’—of the other. All too often this labelling was accepted by
those in opposition. Many socialists in the West and the Third World were
misled into believing the rulers of the USSR were on their side, while many
dissidents in the Eastern bloc believed Western leaders who claimed to stand
for ‘freedom’ and ‘democracy’. Those who stood out against this nonsense at
the beginning of the 1950s were tiny in number.
The Cold War never became hot on a world scale. If it had, few of us
would be around. But it did become hot in Korea. The rival dictators
established North and South of the partition line in 1945 each sought to gain
legitimacy by unifying the country, and there were clashes from the spring of
1949 onwards. The Northern dictator, Kim Il Sung, decided to act before his
Southern rival, Syngman Rhee, got the chance. He launched an attack in June
1950, after receiving the go-ahead from Stalin, expecting it to cause an
immediate collapse of the Southern regime. Neither he nor Stalin thought the
US would intervene. But the army of the South did not collapse, although it
retreated to the southern tip of the country, and the US rushed to intervene. It
was worried about the impact that an Eastern bloc victory in Korea would
have on a still devastated and impoverished Japan, where a powerful
Communist Party was using revolutionary rhetoric. US president Truman also
saw war in Korea as an excuse for persuading a previously reluctant Congress
to approve a massive increase in military spending.
The war lasted three years. The human cost was enormous. There were
500,000 Western casualties and three times that number on the other side. Two
million Korean civilians died, and half the Southern population lost their
homes or became refugees. The mass of the Korean people gained nothing at
all. The final demarcation line was the same as at the beginning, and millions
of people were precluded from ever seeing friends and relatives on the other
side. There had been considerable support for Kim Il Sung in the South when
the war began, and some guerilla activity to back his armies. Those Southern
leftists who stayed behind in the South remained in prison for decades; those
who retreated North with Kim Il Sung’s armies were imprisoned or executed
as ‘unreliable elements’. Meanwhile a succession of dictators ruled South
Korea, and it would be almost 40 years before its population had a chance to
exercise even the most limited ‘democracy’ for which the war was supposedly
fought.
This futile and barbaric war summed up the Cold War. The massive
technological advances of the previous two centuries were marshalled to
threaten humanity with destruction by rival ruling classes. Each used the
language of the Enlightenment to subjugate as much of the world as possible,
and each succeeded in convincing large numbers of people it was right to do
so.
The shortest golden age
Poverty and insecurity are in the process of disappearing. Living standards are
rising rapidly; the fear of unemployment is steadily weakening; and the
ordinary young worker has hopes that would never have entered his father’s
head.269
These were the words of British right wing social democrat Anthony Crosland
in 1956. His conclusion, like Bernstein’s 60 years earlier, was that capitalism
had overcome its crises and that ‘we stand…on the threshold of mass
abundance’.270
Subsequent events proved him wrong. But there was no challenging the
statistics he marshalled. World capitalism went through the most sustained
boom it had ever experienced. By 1970 the US economy was turning out three
times as much as in 1940, German industrial output was up fivefold on 1949,
and French output up fourfold. Italy was transformed from a peasant country
into a major industrial power, and Japan leapt ahead to take second position
behind the US. No wonder many economic historians today describe the period
as a ‘golden age’.
The lives of vast numbers of people were transformed. Unemployment fell
to levels only known before in brief periods of boom—3 percent in the US in
the early 1950s, 1.5 percent in Britain, and 1 percent in West Germany by
1960. There was a gradual and more or less uninterrupted rise in real wages in
the US, Britain and Scandinavia in the 1950s, and in France and Italy in the
1960s. Workers were living better than their parents, and expected their
children to live better still.
It was not just a question of higher incomes. Wages could be spent on a
range of consumer goods—vacuum cleaners, washing machines, refrigerators,
televisions, instant hot water systems. There was a qualitative leap in the
working class standard of living. Housework remained a chore for women, but
no longer entailed endless hours of boiling and kneeling and scrubbing. Food
could be purchased weekly rather than daily (opening the door for the
supermarket to replace the corner shop). Entertainment of sorts was on tap in
the home, even for those who could not afford the cinema, theatre or dancehall.
There were other changes as well. Employers conceded the five day rather
than the five and a half day week, and more than a one week annual holiday.
Concessions which had seemed a great gain for workers in France in 1936
became commonplace in Western Europe and North America. Holidays for the
masses came to mean more than a couple of days in the country or a week at
the seaside. Workers whose ambition in the past had been restricted to buying a
bicycle could now save up for a second hand car. For the first time young
workers had incomes high enough to constitute a market in their own right.
‘Youth culture’ was born in the mid-1950s out of the seemingly insatiable
demand for pop songs and fashions fuelled by teenage dreams and adolescent
insecurities.
The changes in consumption and lifestyle were matched by changes in
production. New techniques from the inter-war years came into their own.
New or expanded factories with new workforces turned out washing machines,
refrigerators, vacuum cleaners, televisions, and, above all, cars. There were
more than 70 million manufacturing workers in the US and more than eight
million in Britain, concentrated in plants employing hundreds, thousands or, in
the case of some car and aerospace plants, tens of thousands of workers. Over
time the mass production factory became the model for many other sorts of
employment. Its pattern of regimentation spread to employees of the burgeoning
supermarket chains, its time and motion studies to typing pools and data-
processing centres, its payment system to coal mining, and its managerial
methods to dock work and construction. So widespread were such factory-
inspired approaches that some industrial sociologists used the word ‘Fordism’
to characterise the period. But just as the factory of the industrial revolution
had provided workers with the potential to fight to improve their conditions,
so, on an even greater scale, did the spread of factory-like employment in the
long boom. The car plants of Detroit, Turin, Coventry, Dagenham, Cologne and
Billancourt, the aerospace plants of Seattle and the arms plants of California
joined the great steel plants, coalfields and shipbuilding yards to offer centres
of potential resistance to the owners of capital. Under conditions of full
employment this was something capital itself had to take into account. In North
America and most of Western Europe it relied upon politicians who preached
‘consensus’ to stabilise society.
The years of the long boom were years in which the old poor laws were
finally transformed into the ‘welfare state’. From the point of view of capital
this was partly a question of using trade union or political intermediaries
(social democratic politicians in Europe, ‘liberal’ Democrats in the US) to buy
the consent of a workforce which was potentially much stronger than it had
been before the war. It was also a way of making sure that expensive labour
power was reproduced efficiently through measures to improve child health
and education. In either case, ‘reform’ of welfare meant improvement, not, as it
meant in the 19th century and means today, cutting welfare so as to compel
people to sell their labour power more cheaply.
The long boom brought other changes of immense importance in the
advanced countries. A shortage of labour caused capital to scour the world for
fresh supplies of workers. Migrant workers from rural Italy were soon
labouring in Belgian mines and Swiss factories as well as adding to the
growing populations of Milan and Turin. The flow of black former share-
croppers to Los Angeles, Detroit and Chicago became a torrent. German firms
welcomed refugees from the east, and organised the arrival of millions of
‘guest workers’ from Turkey and Yugoslavia. French firms recruited labour
from north Africa. Britain’s health service sought workers in the Caribbean,
and its textile plants workers in Punjab. Capitalism had long since drawn
together the labour of people in all continents through the world market. Now it
was drawing together many of the peoples in its great cities. This led to more
or less spontaneous fusions of the distinct cultures from which people came.
But it also led to racist attempts to turn ethnic groups against one another.
Finally, the boom led to historic changes in relations between the sexes.
Desperate for new sources of labour power, capital turned to women to supply
it, as in the early days of the industrial revolution. There had always been
some industries which depended on women, especially textiles, and there had
been continual growth in the number of women in the industrial labour force
since at least the time of the First World War. But the great majority of married
women (80 percent in Britain in 1950) did not have paid employment.
Concerned to ensure the reproduction of the labour force, the state encouraged
married women to stay at home, look after their children and cater for their
husbands—and most married women did not find the low wages they could
earn was a sufficient incentive to carry the double burden of paid employment
and domestic labour. A massive change occurred with the long boom. The new
domestic appliances reduced the burden of housework, making it easier to do
paid work as well. Employers were keen to take on women, on a part time
basis compatible with childcare if necessary, and the need for extra money to
buy domestic appliances provided an incentive for women to take the jobs.
The new arrangements were a result of economic pressures. But they had
much wider implications. Women who were drawn into employment
welcomed the independence that a wage gave them. It made them more
prepared to stand up for themselves. Women had largely been denied a public
role ever since the rise of class society 5,000 years before. Now a majority of
women were being drawn out of the private sphere of the home into the public
sphere of industry.
The double burden persisted. One reason many employers welcomed
women workers was that they could get away with paying them low wages.
The labour market was still structured round the notion that a man’s income
mattered more than a woman’s. A mass of ideological stereotypes supported
this, meaning women were usually left, literally, holding the baby. But in its
drive for profits and accumulation capital was creating conditions in which
women would gain the confidence to challenge this set-up. It was laying the
ground for an unparalleled demand for women’s liberation, even if it could
never satisfy that demand.
Colonial freedom
On 15 August 1947 Jawaharlal Nehru raised the Indian national flag above the
Red Fort in Delhi. Britain was leaving the ‘Jewel in the Crown’ of its empire.
The age of empire was coming to an end a mere 60 years after the scramble for
Africa, although its death throes were to last through to the final abandonment
of white minority rule in South Africa in the 1990s.
Britain’s rulers had not given up their hold on India willingly. Their
attempts to avoid doing so left a divided subcontinent awash with the blood of
communal fighting.
The Indian national movement had gained new momentum in the 1930s.
The world slump had impoverished the countryside. ‘Agrarian radicalism was
found everywhere, from the princely state of Kashmir, far in the north, to
Andhra and Travancore in the south’.271 The number of workers involved in
strikes rose from 128,000 in 1932 to 220,000 in 1934.272 The influence of
Congress grew as did that of its left wing, led by figures like Nehru and Subhas
Chandra Bose. Congress candidates who campaigned on a programme
including reductions in rents and taxes swept the board in elections for
provincial assemblies in 1937. Of the seats reserved for Muslims, the Muslim
League took only a quarter.
But the real power within Congress remained with the right and with a
coterie of Indian capitalists close to Gandhi. Congress-run provincial
governments were soon passing anti-strike laws, stalling the class-based
agitation. The way was open for a revival of communal conflicts, as Muslim
separatists blamed all Hindus for the behaviour of Hindu landowners, and
Hindu chauvinists blamed all Muslims for the misdeeds of Muslim
landowners.
Hostility towards Britain grew when it announced that India was at war
with Germany without consulting any Indians, and then refused even to
consider giving India a government of its own while claiming to fight for
‘freedom’. Even Gandhi agreed to a mass ‘Quit India’ campaign in 1942. There
were strikes, mass demonstrations by students and workers, and repeated
clashes in which police beat people off the streets. Police fired on unarmed
demonstrations on hundreds of occasions. There were guerrilla attacks on
British installations, police stations were burned down, telegraph wires cut
and railway lines blocked. Repression eventually broke the movement. There
were 2,000 casualties and 2,500 sentenced to whipping in Bombay alone.
Villages were burned and even machine-gunned from the air. But the British
viceroy, General Archibald Wavell, told Churchill late in 1943 that ‘the
repressive force necessary to hold India after the war would exceed Britain’s
means’.273
The imperial authorities had one last card to play. They turned to the
Muslim League as a counterweight to Congress. They claimed it represented
all Muslims and gave it control of several provinces despite its poor
performance in the 1937 elections. Its best known leader, Mohammed Ali
Jinnah, now embraced the demand for a separate Muslim state—one he had
previously opposed—even though it was impossible to draw the boundaries of
such a state without including within it very large numbers of Hindus and Sikhs
and excluding the very large number of Muslims who lived in Hindu majority
areas. The Communist Party, which had opposed communal division in the
past, went along with this demand as part of its support for the British war
effort, claiming that Muslims and Hindus were two different ‘nations’.
There was still enormous potential for the national movement to break
through the communal divide. In February 1946 Indian ratings in the British
navy in Bombay began protests against racial insults, and the lower pay they
received than white sailors. The protests escalated into mutinies on 78 ships
and 20 shore stations, backed up by demonstrations and strikes by students and
workers.274 The mutineers carried Hindu, Muslim and red flags. It was the first
time the military forces established to defend the empire had turned against it
in mass since 1857—and they had done so in a way that opened the possibility
of forging Muslim-Hindu-Sikh unity from below and undercutting
communalism. But the leaders of Congress were not prepared to countenance
this. Gandhi opposed the mutiny and Nehru tried to quieten it down.
Communalism was able to revive, even though the mutiny sank any British
hopes of hanging on to power.
Jinnah’s Muslim League took the bulk of the Muslim seats in elections—
the only time it ever did so—and treated this as a mandate to press for a
separate state through communal agitation. In Bengal the Muslim League head
of the provincial government, Suhrawardy—a man who had made millions
through black market deals in grain during the great famine of 1942-43—
unleashed a wave of mob violence against Hindus.275 Hindu chauvinists seized
the opportunity to organise counter-pogroms against Muslims, and 5,000 died.
There were communal riots in city after city in the days that followed, laying
the ground for the final horror a year later.
Congress leaders and their business backers were desperate to get their
hands on a state of their own, even if it was a truncated one, and agreed to
partition the subcontinent with Jinnah. An English civil servant, Radcliffe, who
knew nothing about India, drew a line of partition which chopped Bengal and
the Punjab in half. There were completely inter-mixed Hindu, Muslim and Sikh
populations on either side of the Punjab border, including the neighbouring
cities of Lahore and Amritsar. Now bands of right wing Muslim thugs on one
side of the line, and right wing Hindu and Sikh thugs on the other, set out to
secure the territory allocated them by massacring, terrorising and driving out
those belonging to the ‘wrong’ religion. Somewhere between 250,000 and a
million people died. At the same time mobs attacked the substantial Muslim
minorities in cities such as Delhi and Lucknow, ‘persuading’ them to migrate to
Pakistan.
The horror of partition was followed by a final disaster—war between the
two new states. Both claimed Kashmir, which had a Muslim majority, a Hindu
prince and an imprisoned Muslim opposition leader who supported Congress.
Pakistan and India both made armed grabs for it. The Indian army reached the
capital, Srinigar, first. There was a year of intermittent fighting before a truce
left the rival armies staring at each other across a demarcation line hundreds of
miles long.
Partition had a devastating effect on both countries. It strengthened the
hands of the Hindu chauvinists in India, encouraging the trend for Indian party
politics to be based on shifting coalitions of bosses of different local castes,
linguistic and religious groups. Military confrontation with Pakistan also
absorbed resources desperately needed for improving people’s lives.
The effects on Pakistan were even worse. Religion was the only thing its
peoples had in common—and even then there were clashes between the Sunni
and Shia versions of Islam. The country was divided in two, separated by
several hundred miles of Indian territory. In the eastern part most people spoke
Bengali, and in the west Punjabi. But the national language was Urdu, spoken
only by the minority of the population who had migrated from central north
India. Moreover, vast areas of the western part were dominated by landowners
who exercised almost feudal power. The outcome was continual political
instability, a succession of military dictatorships, the breakaway of eastern
Pakistan in 1971 to form Bangladesh—following the bloody repression of a
popular revolt—further military coups in western Pakistan, the execution of its
former prime minister, and a state of near civil war in its main industrial city,
Karachi, in the 1990s.
However, the disaster of partition could not prevent Britain’s withdrawal
having an enormous impact elsewhere. The imperialists were on the retreat,
and there were people in every colony prepared to learn the lessons.
‘People’s China’
In the summer of 1949, just two years after the departure of Britain from India,
a People’s Liberation Army led by old Communists like Mao Zedong, Zhu De
and Liu Shaoqi occupied Beijing. As it marched south to unify all of China
except for the large island of Taiwan and the British city-colony of Hong Kong,
the days of the foreign concessions and foreign warships which had imposed
themselves on the country for a century were over for good.
Mao’s army had started life as a group of Communists and dissident
soldiers from the nationalist armies who had escaped the massacres at the
hands of Chiang Kai Shek in the late 1920s by establishing a base on the
border of Kiangsi province in the south. They had recruited local peasants to
an army which must have resembled the rebel peasant armies thrown up
periodically in Chinese history. When pressed by Chiang’s troops they took it
on a circuitous 7,000 mile ‘long march’ through south and west China to Yenan
in the remote north west. Fewer than one in ten of the 100,000 who set off
arrived. But this rump was able to build new support, particularly after the
Japanese attack on China in 1937.
Chiang Kai Shek’s army was driven far inland by Japan and was no longer
in any condition to fight the Communist forces. He had little choice but to agree
that the rival Chinese forces should tolerate one another while fighting Japan.
But his own army seemed incapable of fighting anyone. Most of its generals
were motivated only by the desire to grow rich at the expense of their soldiers
and the peasants whose lands they passed through. The People’s Liberation
Army, by contrast, steadily built up its strength. It gained prestige among the
educated middle classes by fighting Japan, peasant support by a policy of
reducing rents, and even a degree of backing from some Chinese capitalists by
providing stable conditions for their operations.
The Japanese collapse in 1945 found Chiang with much the bigger army
and in receipt of vast sums of aid from the US (and lesser sums from Russia,
for Stalin at this stage gave no backing to the Communists). But Mao had an
army with higher morale and better discipline. When civil war broke out
between the two, Chiang’s army began to disintegrate, with whole sections
(including their generals) changing sides. By the end of 1949 Chiang Kai Shek
had fled the mainland for Taiwan—where the Kuomintang still dominates the
government today.
Mao’s victory was a terrible shock for the US, which had come to see
China as part of its informal empire as it poured funds into the pockets of
Chiang Kai Shek’s generals. It reasoned that Mao was a Communist and Stalin
was a Communist, and so it had suffered this setback as a result of a world
Communist conspiracy—ignoring the fact that Stalin had provided aid to
Chiang and advised Mao not to take power. US military operations in the
Korean War, which broke out only months after Mao’s victory, involved troops
sweeping right through North Korea to the Chinese border, virtually forcing
China to come in on the North Korean side and driving Mao into Stalin’s arms
(although their alliance was only to last a dozen years). At the same time the
US came to see propping up French colonialism in Vietnam as part of its
defence of the ‘free world’ against ‘Communism’, and it provided the funds
and arms which allowed France to keep fighting until 1954.
Much of the left internationally drew a similar conclusion to the US but put
the opposite interpretation on it. China and Russia were now, jointly, the bloc
of ‘peace and socialism’. What is more, some argued, China showed how easy
it was to take power through rural guerrilla warfare. They ignored the special
circumstances of China in the second half of the 1930s and the first half of the
1940s—the vast distances, the Japanese invasion, the extreme corruption in
Chiang’s army. They also failed to see that, for all Mao’s dependence on
peasant recruits for his army, it cadre and the administrative structure in his
‘liberated areas’ were made up of radicalised members of the educated middle
classes from the cities.
The empires’ last stand
Mao’s victory, coming so soon after the British evacuation of India, added to
the feeling in the colonies everywhere that imperialism could be beaten. There
had already been stirrings of revolt in French Algeria and an attempt to
establish an independent government in Vietnam. A nationalist movement had
begun to grow in the huge Dutch colony of the East Indies before the war. Its
leaders had taken advantage of the Japanese occupation to extend their base of
support, half-collaborating with the occupying forces and proclaiming
themselves the government of a new country, Indonesia, when Japan left. Now
they fought the attempt to reimpose Dutch colonialism, achieving independence
in 1949 under President Sukarno. In Malaya the local Communist Party, which
had formed the backbone of the British-backed resistance to Japan, prepared to
wage a war for freedom from Britain. Various students from Africa and the
West Indies such as Kwame Nkrumah, Jomo Kenyatta and Eric Williams, who
had known each other in London in the 1930s, returned home to agitate for
independence too. In the Arab capitals of Damascus, Baghdad and Cairo a
new, young middle class generation, sometimes strategically positioned within
the officer corps of the state, began to plot to achieve real independence and to
dream of a united ‘Arab nation’ from the Atlantic to the Gulf.
The instinct of the colonial powers was to react to the liberation
movements as they had in the past, with machine-guns, bombing raids and
concentration camps. This was the reaction of France in Vietnam, Madagascar,
Algeria, and its west African colonies; of Britain in Malaya, Kenya, Cyprus,
Aden and the Rhodesias276; and of Portugal in Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea Bissau.
But it became clear, sooner or later, that this approach was
counterproductive, serving only to deepen popular hostility to European
interests. A growing number of rulers saw that a better policy would be to
cultivate local figures who would faithfully serve their interests as heads of
‘independent’ governments. Britain adopted this approach in much of the
Middle East, in west Africa and in the West Indies. In Malaya, Britain used
heavy repression against the Communist-led liberation movement (troops cut
off the hands and even the heads of dead ‘terrorists’ and forcibly resettled half
a million people in villages surrounded by barbed wire). But it also promised
independence to ‘moderate’ Malay politicians, who built support by playing on
racial distrust of the Chinese minority. Even where Britain did try and stand
firm against making concessions to the ‘natives’—as in Kenya, where it
bombed villages and herded people into concentration camps where many
died, and in Cyprus, where troops used torture—it ended up negotiating a
‘peaceful’ transfer of power to political leaders (Jomo Kenyatta and
Archbishop Makarios) whom it had previously imprisoned or exiled.
France was eventually forced to adopt this approach in Vietnam and
Algeria. But it only did so after spending vast sums and killing huge numbers
of people in wars it could not win. The poison infected French politics as
disaffected colonialist generals attempted a succession of military coups in the
years 1958-62 (resulting in the National Assembly granting near-dictatorial
powers to General de Gaulle in 1958). The eventual agreement to Algerian
independence led to a million Algerian settlers decamping to France and a
wave of right wing bombings by the OAS terrorist group in Paris.
Western Europe’s most backward capitalism, Portugal, tried to hold on to
its colonies, but was eventually forced to abandon them in 1974-75 when the
cost of subduing them provoked a revolutionary upheaval in Portugal itself. All
that remained were the two white racist settler regimes in southern Africa—
Southern Rhodesia, which was eventually forced to accept black majority rule
as Zimbabwe in 1980, and South Africa, which finally followed suit in 1994.
The retreat of the West European powers from direct rule over half of Asia
and almost all of Africa was a process of epochal importance. It marked the
end of almost two centuries during which the line of world history passed
through London and Paris. However, it did not mark the end of imperialism, in
the sense that much of the world remained dominated by interests centred in a
few economically advanced countries. Bitter conflicts in the Americas, south
east Asia and the Middle East would repeatedly testify to this fact.
Oil and blood
The Middle East, with its huge oil reserves, was by far the most important
prize for any imperialism in the second half of the 20th century. Britain had
extended its Middle East empire during the First World War by collaborating
with the ruler of Mecca, Sharrif Hussein, in an ‘Arab National Revolt’ and
promising him all the territories ruled by Turkey. But the British government
also promised Zionist leaders that it would allocate one of the Arab lands,
Palestine, to Jewish settlers from Europe, seeing them as a barrier against any
Arab threat to the nearby Suez Canal. As the Israeli political leader Abba Eban
later explained, ‘We would help Britain become the ruling power and Britain
would help us to develop the Jewish National Home’.277
Such double-dealing worked, up to a point. British firms got their hands on
the oil reserves of Iraq and Iran, and Jewish settler volunteers worked with
Britain to put down a Palestinian Arab revolt, the most serious rebellion to
face the British Empire in the 1930s. But over time the policy backfired. There
was growing Arab antagonism toward the Zionist settlers as they bought land
from rich Arab owners and drove off the peasant families who had been
cultivating it for centuries. Jews who had fled oppression in Europe found they
were expected to oppress others in Palestine. Britain then tried to defuse Arab
bitterness by restricting Jewish immigration and ended up under attack from
both sides. By 1946 Jewish paramilitary groups which had been armed to
suppress the Arabs were carrying out attacks on British troops and
installations.
Britain decided to escape from the problem it had created by withdrawing
its troops in 1947, relying for the defence of its oil interests on the puppet Arab
monarchies in Iraq, Jordan and Egypt. The US and Russia were both keen to
move in as Britain moved out, jointly backing a United Nations resolution
partitioning Palestine and establishing an Israeli settler state (allocating half
the land to one third of the population). The settlers received substantial
supplies of arms from Communist-run Czechoslovakia and backing from the
US. As fighting broke out they terrorised much of the Arab population into
fleeing by massacring the inhabitants of the village of Deir Yassin, and then
defeated an ill-organised army sent by the Arab monarchies, allegedly to help
the Palestinians—an army which ended up grabbing the rump Palestinian area
(a mere 20 percent of the original land) and dividing it between the kings of
Jordan and Egypt. Israel was established as a powerful settler state, willing
and able to assist Western interests—which usually meant the US—in return
for arms and financial aid.
This could not bring stability to the region. The bitterness caused by
Israel’s victory over the Arab armies helped spark a military coup in Egypt
which brought nationalist officers led by Abdul Nasser to power and ended the
pro-British monarchy. Nasser’s move to nationalise the Suez Canal, owned by
Britain and France, provoked British imperialism’s last great fling in the
region. In November 1956 British, French and Israeli troops launched a joint
attack on Egypt. The attack almost succeeded militarily, but completely
backfired politically. The US took advantage of Britain’s financial problems to
pull the plug on the operation and supplant Britain as the dominant power in
the Middle East, while a wave of anti-British agitation throughout the region
led to the overthrow of the British-backed Iraqi monarchy two years later.
The US followed Britain’s policy of relying both on the Israeli settlers and
Arab client regimes. It provided Israel with more military aid than anywhere
else in the world. At the same time it worked closely with the Saudi Arabian
monarchy, encouraged coups which re-established the absolute rule of the Shah
of Iran (in 1953), and gave power in Iraq to the Ba’ath Party, including a young
Saddam Hussein, in 1962. The US was highly successful in asserting hegemony
over the region and its oil. It could only do so, however, by encouraging
antagonisms between states and peoples which burst into a succession of wars
—the Arab-Israeli wars of 1967 and 1973, the long civil war in Lebanon after
1976, the appalling war between Iraq and Iran throughout the 1980s, Israel’s
invasion of Lebanon in 1982, and the US-led war against Iraq in 1991. The
20th century was again seeing wealth, on these occasions oil wealth,
transmuted into blood.
Through the looking glass
The form of economic organisation established in Russia fascinated many of
the newly independent ex-colonial countries. Most had suffered economic
stagnation or even regression under colonial rule. The food supply per head
was no higher in India in the 1950s than it had been at the time of Akbar 400
years before. Meanwhile the Russian economy had shown it could grow faster
than any other and, it seemed, avoid the periodic downturns which had plagued
capitalism in the West.
It has been fashionable since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 to claim
that nothing ever worked in the Russia of Stalin or his successors, Khrushchev
and Brezhnev. In fact, for 30 years Stalinist methods produced more rapid rates
of economic growth than those experienced anywhere else in the world—
except perhaps Japan. What had been an overwhelmingly backward
agricultural society in 1928 had become a mainly industrial country capable of
challenging the US in Cold War weaponry and beating the US to put a satellite
(the Sputnik) and then a man (Yuri Gagarin) into space.
Even bitter enemies of the Russian system recognised this at the time. It
was possible for the future British Labour Party prime minister Harold Wilson
to speak in 1953 of ‘Russia’s spectacular increase in production and
productive capacity’.278 The perception was not false. As a relatively recent
economic history of Eastern Europe tells, ‘The average rate of economic
growth achieved in the region during the first two decades of central planning
(1950-70) was better than the peak rates shown in the best inter-war years
(1925-29)’.279
Stalinism in Russia arose from the isolation and strangulation of the
revolution of 1917. In Eastern Europe it was imposed from above—except in
Yugoslavia where it was introduced by the leaders of the resistance army
which drove out Germany. But in each case it was not only repression which
enabled it to flourish and establish deep roots in its early years. By providing a
means of building up industry it also made wide sections of society’s middle
layers feel they had an important future. It inspired enthusiasm as well as fear.
It also provided vast numbers of people with a degree of upward mobility—
the skilled industrial worker stood a chance of becoming a manager, and the
peasant could escape from the primitiveness of rural life to the wider horizons
of the city.
The sense that it was possible to change society, industrialise, urbanise
and educate the masses, appealed to sections of the educated middle classes in
every non-industrial country in the world—an appeal heightened by the
understanding that an expansion of industry meant an expansion in the number
of well-salaried positions for themselves. But no expansion was possible
simply by waiting for small firms to grow enough to compete with the major
corporations based in the advanced countries. The small firms would be
driven out of business first. They needed size—and that could only come about
by the state fusing them together and ploughing in funds. They also needed
protection from direct foreign competition, which only the state could provide.
State capitalism, usually misnamed ‘socialism’, seemed the answer.
Already at the turn of the century the state had played a central role in the
development of large-scale industry in Japan and tsarist Russia. The First
World War and the crisis of the inter-war years had massively increased its
role in the advanced countries. By the late 1930s the scale of state control of
industry in Nazi Germany was such as to persuade the ‘Austro-Marxist’
economist and former finance minister Hilferding that capitalism had been
replaced by a new mode of production.280 Even in the most ‘free market’ of the
Western countries, the US, the state built most plants and controlled most
economic activity in the years 1941-44.
The trend towards state capitalism went furthest where locally controlled
industrial development was weakest. So the state played a central role in the
attempts to reorganise capitalism and industrialise Brazil under Vargas, the
populist president of Brazil in the 1930s, and under Peron, the dictator of
Argentina in the 1940s and early 1950s. Against such a background not only
the Communists but also the social democratic and bourgeois politicians who
shared government with them in most of Eastern Europe in 1945-47 took it for
granted that the state would control most of industry and rely on central
‘planning’. In India, even before Congress took power, a group of industrialists
had got together in 1944 to approve a ‘Bombay programme’ for state planning
very much on the Russian model, although using private as well as state
capital.
So India, China, Egypt, Syria, Iraq and Algeria all had powerful state-
owned sectors and long term plans. But this was not a trend confined to states
which called themselves socialist. Much of industry had been state-owned in
Kuomintang China, and the pattern continued in Kuomintang Taiwan—while
the South Korean general, Park, who seized power in a coup in 1961, saw state
planning and control (although not necessarily ownership) of industry as the
only way to overtake North Korea, which was then more advanced.
The flipside of economic growth under Stalinist ‘planning’, as with that
during the industrial revolutions of the West, was the appalling conditions
workers had to endure. But those who ran the growing apparatuses of industry
and the state were not workers, even if some had been once.
In its early years state capitalism seemed to be effective. India and Egypt
in the late 1960s were still overwhelmingly agricultural countries, with most
of their people living in deep poverty, and their new industry faced all sorts of
problems. But they were visibly different to 20 years earlier and much more
part of the modern world. This was expressed in a certain confidence in their
rulers among wide sections of the middle classes, providing stability to the
regimes. Where state capitalist development was accompanied, as in China,
India and Egypt, by land reform which broke up the big estates to the benefit of
the peasants, the rulers also sank strong roots in the countryside—even if the
reform benefited the middle and richer peasants rather than the poorer peasants
and landless labourers.
But the euphoria began to wear off in time—and even as regimes like that
in Egypt began to implement elements of the Stalinist model, signs of its
limitations were already appearing in Russia and Eastern Europe.
The road to 1956
Stalin died in 1953 after a quarter of a century of near-total power. Sometimes
the death of a ruler serves to concentrate the minds of their associates on
problems accumulated over the years, and so it was now.
Stalin’s henchmen were dimly aware that there was enormous discontent
beneath the surface. They also feared that one of their number would gain
control of Stalin’s apparatus of state terror and use it against the rest. Barely
was Stalin’s funeral over when they enacted limited reforms while quarrelling
secretly among themselves (the near-psychopathic police chief Beria was
taken at gunpoint from a leadership meeting and executed).
Then in February 1956 Khrushchev, the Communist Party general
secretary, decided to reveal some home truths to party activists in order to
strengthen his hand in the leadership struggle. He told the 20th party congress
in Moscow that Stalin had been responsible for the murder of thousands of
innocent people and the deportation of millions of members of national
minorities. What is more, he said, Stalin had been incompetent and cowardly at
the time of the German invasion of Russia in 1941. The impact of these
revelations on tens of millions of people across the world who had been taught
to regard Stalin as a near-god was shattering, even if many tried to close their
minds to them.
In the meantime something else had happened that was more important than
the words of Khrushchev about his predecessor. The masses beneath the
apparatus of state capitalist rule had begun to revolt.
The first uprising was in East Germany in June 1953, shortly after Stalin’s
death. Building workers on a giant construction site in East Berlin walked out
on strike when told they would have to work harder for the same pay. Tens of
thousands of people joined them as they demonstrated through the centre of the
city. The next day every major industrial centre in East Germany was strike-
bound. Demonstrators broke into prisons, and attacked police stations and
offices of the ruling party. In the end only the intervention of Russian troops put
down the rising. It was a classic spontaneous workers’ revolt, such as
Germany had seen again and again in 1918-19, but directed against a state
capitalist regime which claimed to rule in the name of the workers. The
sections of workers who struck were those who had been the most left wing
during the Weimar Republic of the 1920s. Some 68 percent of those purged
from the Communist Party in East Berlin for taking part in the rising had been
members before Hitler’s rise to power.281 They were old militants who saw
the rising as a continuation of the struggle for workers’ control to which they
had dedicated their youth.
Shortly after the East German rising there was a revolt in Russia itself, at
the giant slave labour camp in Vorkuta. The quarter of a million prisoners who
worked the mines there went on strike. The government surrounded the miners
with armed troops, offered to negotiate, and then executed the representatives
chosen by the strikers, killing 250. But the action showed how explosive the
discontent could be, and the regime released 90 percent of the camp inmates in
the next two years. As in the US after the civil war, slave labour gave way to
wage labour, the form of exploitation appropriate for ‘primitive accumulation’
to that which fitted an industrialised economy.
However, it was in 1956 in the months after Khrushchev’s denunciation of
Stalin that the potential for revolt really showed itself. A strike in the Polish
city of Poznan turned into a virtual uprising. The regime succeeded in crushing
the movement before it had time to spread, but could not prevent the
shockwaves from it shaking the whole social order. The country seemed on the
verge of revolution in October and November, as rival factions fought for
control at the top of the regime. Censorship broke down, and workers began to
elect their own committees and vow to defend their rights by force. People
talked of a ‘spring in October’ as Gomulka, one of the party leaders
imprisoned in the late 1940s, was brought back to office. He faced down a
threat of military intervention by Russian troops and persuaded the workers to
put their trust in him—with the help of the Catholic church and the US
propaganda station, Radio Free Europe.282
The Polish events acted as a detonator for one of history’s great
revolutions, in Hungary. A demonstration of students gained the support of tens
of thousands of workers as it made its way through Budapest. One section tore
down a huge statue of Stalin. Another went to the radio station, only to be fired
upon by police agents inside. Workers grabbed guns from sports clubs inside
factories, won over soldiers from one of the barracks, and soon took control of
much of the city. In every town in the country similar movements left effective
local power in the hands of factory councils and revolutionary committees.
Peter Fryer, who was sent to Hungary by the British Communist Party
paper, the Daily Worker, reported:
…the striking resemblance [of these committees to] the workers’, peasants’
and soldiers’ councils which were thrown up in Russia in the 1905 Revolution
and in February 1917…They were at once organs of insurrection—the coming
together of delegates elected in the factories and universities, mines and army
units—and organs of popular self government which the armed people
trusted.283
A section of the regime tried to regain control of the movement, very much
as Gomulka was doing in Poland, by putting another disgraced Communist,
Imre Nagy, at the head of a coalition government. But on 4 November—just as
Britain, France and Israel were attacking Egypt—Russian tanks swept into
Budapest and seized key buildings. They faced bitter armed resistance, which
they eventually crushed only by killing thousands, reducing parts of the city to
rubble, and driving more than 200,000 to flee across the border into Austria. A
general strike paralysed the city for more than a fortnight and the Greater
Budapest Central Workers’ Council fulfilled the role, in effect, of an
alternative government to Russia’s puppet ruler, Janos Kadar. But eventually
the workers’ councils were crushed too and their leaders sentenced to years in
prison. There were 350 executions, ‘three quarters of them of workers around
20 years of age’.284 Among those to die were Imre Nagy and four other
members of his short-lived government.
The official Communist line was that the revolution was simply a pro-
capitalist escapade planned by Western spies. As in so many other cases in the
Cold War era, the most common account of the revolution in the West was very
similar. It claimed that the revolution simply aimed to establish a ‘free society’
along Western capitalist lines. In fact most of those who played a leading role
in the revolution had a wider perspective. They remembered the pre-war
dictatorship which had ruled Hungary in the name of capitalist ‘freedom’ and
looked to a different system in which workers’ councils would play a key role,
even if the speed of events did not give them time to clarify what this system
might be. Anyone who doubts this should read the various collections of
documents from Hungary 1956 which have been published since.285 A recent
authoritative Hungarian study of the revolution recounts:
The demands that touched the…daily life of the people could be found mainly
in the manifestos of the factory and workers’ councils. These…contain a
plenitude of detail about the hated piecework, the unjust work quotas and low
wages, the minimal social accomplishments, and the miserable supply of
food…The most active fighters in the revolution struggled not only for freedom
and independence, but also for a humane mode of life and such conditions of
work…for what many believed to be a ‘genuinely socialist’ society…The
intended economic order would place decision-making in industry, mining and
transport in the hands of producers (workers, technicians and other staff)…‘We
reject any attempt to restore the dominance of large landowners, factory
owners and bankers,’ was a statement endorsed by representatives of many
persuasions.286
The Hungarian Revolution challenged the ruling ideologies of both sides in
the Cold War. It proved, to those who had the courage to look facts in the face,
that the USSR had long since ceased to stand in the tradition of Karl Marx,
Frederick Engels and Rosa Luxemburg. It also showed how wrong the liberals
and social democrats were who held that Stalinist totalitarianism could
suppress any move for change from within and, therefore, that it was necessary
to support Western imperialism against it. This pessimism had befogged the
minds of innumerable intellectuals who had once been on the far left—John
Dos Passos, John Steinbeck, Max Shachtman, Stephen Spender, Albert Camus,
James T Farrell, John Strachey, George Orwell, Saul Bellow, the list was
endless. The imagery was of George Orwell’s 1984, of a dictatorship so
powerful that it could brainwash its opponents into saying 2 + 2 = 5. Hungary
showed how quickly such a dictatorship could collapse and out of it emerge
forces pressing for real liberation. If it could happen in Hungary, it could
happen one day in the heartland of Stalinist state capitalism, in Russia.
Rulers of both blocs hastened to bury the memory of the revolution. For
more than a quarter of a century it was forbidden to mention the event in
Hungary other than as a ‘counter-revolution’. As late as 1986 police beat a
student demonstration commemorating it off the streets. In the West it was soon
forgotten. By the early 1970s the butcher Kadar was being talked of in the
Western media as a liberal ‘reformer’. Mutual amnesia enabled both sides to
forget the monolith could crack apart. When it did so again, in Czechoslovakia
in 1968, they were both taken by surprise.
The Cuban Revolution
The United States had its own satellites scattered around the world. In the late
1950s they were concentrated in Central America, south of the Mexican border
(Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Panama and Guatemala), the Caribbean
(Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Haiti) and east Asia (the Philippines,
South Korea, South Vietnam and Thailand). US troops were based permanently
in the Canal Zone which divided Panama, and in South Korea. They had landed
several times in Haiti, Nicaragua and Cuba in the earlier part of century, had
run the Philippines as a colony until 1946, and maintained huge bases both at
Guantanamo on the coast of eastern Cuba, and in the Philippines.
These nominally independent states were usually run by small and often
extremely fragmented ruling groups made up of military figures, landed
oligarchs, political bosses and, occasionally, local capitalists. They had
narrow bases of support locally and tried to compensate by mixing the most
extreme forms of corruption and the nastiest forms of repression. Their
weakness benefited US policy by making them dependent on US aid and
military advisers and ensuring they would not threaten US business interests.
But it also meant that they could easily fall apart if the ability of the US to
intervene in their support ever seemed in doubt. That the US was willing to
make such interventions was shown in 1954 when the CIA organised the
overthrow of a mildly reformist government in Guatemala.
Five years later it registered a failure it could barely cope with. The
corrupt and dictatorial Cuban regime of Fulgencio Batista suddenly collapsed,
leaving power in the hands of a group of guerillas led by Fidel Castro, his
brother Raul and an exiled Argentine doctor, Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara.
The guerillas had landed in a remote part of the island barely two years
earlier. Following their victory a whole revolutionary mythology developed
ascribing their success to the support either of the mass of peasants or the
labourers who worked the island’s sugar plantations. In fact the guerillas’
remoteness cut them off from all but a tiny proportion of the peasantry and all
the labourers. Their victory came from their ability to take advantage of the
extreme political isolation of the Batista regime. It had alienated the island’s
two main middle class parties and upset its capitalist class because of its
extreme corruption—Cuba was a centre of Mafia gangsterism (as shown in the
film The Godfather) and known as the ‘whorehouse of the Caribbean’. It had
also embittered the mass of the population by whittling away social gains made
in the 1930s. In the end even the US stopped providing support for a dictator it
feared was going to fall.
Under such conditions it did not require much to bring about that fall.
Castro’s small band of guerillas (only 20 survived the initial landing at the end
of 1956,287 and there were only 200 in the summer of 1958) were like the
snowball that causes an avalanche. So long as Batista’s army was too corrupt
and feeble to defeat them, their mere existence proved his weakness, and in
time his own army fell apart.
The rebel army which entered Havana on the first day of 1959 had the
backing of all social classes in Cuba. But it still faced the objective conditions
which had led to Batista’s regime having an ever-narrower base of support.
The Cuban economy—dependent on fluctuating world prices for its major
export, sugar, and with output per head no higher than in the 1920s—was
incapable of meeting the contradictory demands of the different classes. The
capitalists and their US business partners wanted to raise their profits and be
free to move them abroad. The workers and labourers wanted increased
earnings, and the peasants an improvement in their miserable incomes.
Members of the young educated middle class, who had provided both the
cadres for the guerrilla movement and its large support network in the cities,
wanted to develop the Cuban economy so as to provide themselves both with a
sense of worth and well paid careers.
Castro could not satisfy one class without antagonising others. To satisfy
the capitalists would be to head down the road taken so disastrously by
Batista, and this Castro was not prepared to do. Instead he opted for a policy
of providing certain reforms to gain working class and peasant support (land
reform, the provision of welfare benefits and healthcare, and literacy
campaigns) combined with the use of the state to push ambitious schemes of
industrialisation. It was a choice which inevitably meant a clash with
entrenched capitalist interests and US big business since, ‘The Cuban economy
was so wedded to the US economy that the country was in many ways an
appendage of it’.288
Eighteen months after Castro took power the US-owned oil refineries on
the island refused to process cheap Russian oil. Castro nationalised them. The
US retaliated by ending the arrangement by which it bought the bulk of Cuba’s
sugar harvest; Cuba nationalised the US-owned sugar companies, factories and
electricity and telephone monopolies, and developed its trade links with
Russia. Anti-Castro hysteria swept the US media, while business exiles in
Miami raised an ever louder cry about Castro’s ‘betrayal’ of the revolution.
Then in April 1961 the CIA tried to land an army of exiles intent on
overthrowing Castro on the island’s Bay of Pigs, while unmarked US planes
bombed Cuban airfields. The escapade was a miserable failure as the Cuban
population rallied behind the regime.
Endorsement of the landing had been one of the first actions of new US
president John F Kennedy. He became a cult figure for many liberals after his
assassination in 1962. But he showed no sign of liberalism in his dealings with
Cuba. He and his brother Robert developed a deep personal enmity towards
Castro, and gave the go-ahead for the CIA to plot with Mafia figures against
the Cuban leader’s life—including such ludicrous schemes as the use of
exploding cigars! They also prepared contingency plans for a US-backed
invasion of the island. In 1962 their manoeuvres led to a direct confrontation
with Russia.
For many people who lived through it, the week of 20-27 October 1962
was the most frightening of their lives—the closest the Cold War came to
turning into a nuclear war. US warships had surrounded Cuba, intent on using
force to stop any Soviet vessels reaching it. Intercontinental ballistic missiles,
submarine-based missiles and 1,400 bombers were on alert. Scores of
bombers remained continuously in the air, each armed with several nuclear
weapons and ready to move to targets in the USSR the moment the order came.
And in Florida, just 60 miles from Cuba, the US assembled the largest invasion
force since the Second World War—100,000 troops, 90 ships, 68 squadrons of
aircraft and eight aircraft carriers.
Kennedy’s government had learned that the USSR under Khrushchev was
secretly installing nuclear missiles in Cuba. The US could already hit Russian
cities from its bases in Western Europe and Turkey. The Cuban missiles would
provide Russia with the same capacity to hit US cities. Castro and Che
Guevara welcomed the missiles, assuming they would be a deterrent against a
US attack on Cuba. Undoubtedly this was mistaken, since there was little
likelihood of Russia risking the destruction of its own cities in a nuclear
exchange merely to please the Cubans.
The US government, however, was prepared to risk nuclear war in order
to get the missiles removed. How close the world came to nuclear war was
later revealed by the president’s brother, Robert Kennedy. ‘We all agreed, if
the Russians were prepared to go to war over Cuba, they were prepared to go
to nuclear war and we might as well have the showdown then as six months
later.’ Transcripts of the US presidential discussions show the government of
the world’s greatest power was indeed prepared to risk nuclear war with
Russia.289 They also show the Kennedy obsession with Cuba was connected to
a wider issue—the fear of an erosion of US global hegemony.
War was only avoided because Khrushchev backed down at the last minute
and agreed to withdraw the missiles—a decision which he only narrowly
carried in the Politburo and which antagonised the Cuban leaders. In effect, the
Russian leadership decided it could not challenge the existing partition of the
world between itself and US imperialism—just as the US had not challenged
that partition at the time of the Hungarian Revolution. This had important
implications in the years which followed. Both sides continued to accumulate
enormous quantities of nuclear weapons. But they did so on the basis of what
they called ‘détente’—an agreement not to trample too much on each other’s
toes. This continued right through to 1980, despite huge upheavals in both
camps in the interim.
The Cuban leaders were distraught at Russia’s decision to withdraw the
missiles. They had been used as a bargaining chip, and there was little they
could do about it, since they were dependent on Russian economic support.
What that dependency meant at home was shown by a scaling down of plans
for industrialisation and a return to the pre-revolutionary reliance on sugar
exports. ‘Diversification of agriculture’, the message of the early years of the
revolution, was replaced by a call for a record sugar harvest. Internationally
there was a brief attempt to break out of the constraints imposed by Russian
policy. The Cuban leaders arranged ‘Organisations of Latin American
Solidarity’ and ‘Tricontinental’ conferences at which they made half-concealed
criticisms of the policies Russia was imposing on Third World Communist
parties and liberation movements. Che Guevara eventually left Cuba to attempt
to put these criticisms into practice through guerrilla struggle in Congo-Zaire
and Bolivia. But neither the criticisms nor Che Guevara’s practice were based
on a concrete assessment of the class forces in a particular situation. Instead
Guevara attempted to impose the model of revolutionary struggle which had
been successful in the very special circumstances of Cuba. The Congo
intervention was a miserable failure and the Bolivian action stumbled from
disaster to disaster until Che was killed—shot after capture by a CIA agent. By
1968 Castro and the Cuban government were back supporting the Russian
approach.
The Vietnam War
In the early 1960s the US government saw Vietnam as just one place among
many where it was using ‘advisers’ to organise military actions against
opposition forces. ‘We have 30 Vietnams’, Robert Kennedy told a
journalist.290 On the face of it he had reason to be confident. A US government
programme designed to stabilise Latin America, ‘The Alliance for Progress’,
seemed to have been successful in stopping any repetition of the Cuban
Revolution, and guerrilla movements in Venezuela, Guatemala, Bolivia and
elsewhere were defeated. In the mid-1960s the timely deployment of US troops
had stopped the advance of Congolese rebels against the capital of the US’s
client dictator Mobutu and thwarted an attempt at a popular rising in the
Dominican Republic. In Indonesia there was not even the need for US troops.
The CIA worked with General Suharto, who used the excuse of an abortive
putsch by left wing generals to murder half a million people, destroy the most
powerful Communist Party in the Third World, and replace the populist
independence leader Sukarno.
But Robert Kennedy’s boast about Vietnam proved misplaced. The country
had been partitioned at the time of the settlement of the Korean War in 1954.
France’s attempt to hold the country as a colony had been dealt a devastating
blow when the Vietminh liberation movement inflicted a major defeat on it at
Dien Bien Phu. But the Vietminh had been persuaded by Russia and China to
take control of only the Northern half of the country, leaving the Vietnamese
groups which had backed France to run the South pending elections for the
country as a whole. The US, which had been funding most of the French war
effort, now sponsored the government that ran the South and helped to ensure
the elections never took place.
There was increasing repression directed against any opposition in the
South. Buddhist monks protested by setting fire to themselves, and former
Vietminh fighters fled to the countryside and took up arms in self defence. Soon
there was widespread guerrilla warfare, continual unrest in the towns, and a
government whose survival depended on increasing amounts of US support.
The 400 ‘advisers’ when Kennedy took over the presidency had risen to
18,000 by the time of his assassination. In 1965 marines landed at Danang
naval base, and there were 33,500 US troops in the country within a month,
with 210,000 by the end of the year. Meanwhile the US air force waged the
biggest bombing campaign in history, pounding away at both the North and
South, day after day, week after week, year after year, in the belief that it could
force the liberation forces to abandon the struggle.
The Vietnam War was not like the war in Korea, a struggle waged by
regular armies which the rulers of the North could call off at any time. It had
grown out of spontaneous struggles against a repressive regime, and the
leaders of North Vietnam could not turn their back on these without doing
enormous damage to their prestige as the pioneers of the struggle for national
independence.
The US was trapped in a war of attrition from which there was no easy
way out. It could establish a forward base at Khe Sanh near the partition line
with the North and, at great cost, stop the liberation forces taking it. But it
could not use the base to subdue the surrounding countryside, and eventually
had to abandon it. It could maintain control of the towns, but it could not avoid
being almost overrun by a sudden offensive by the liberation forces at Tet, the
Vietnamese new year, early in 1968. It could not stop the escalating cost of the
Vietnam War increasing its total military outlay by 30 percent and causing US
big business to protest. Finally, it could not prevent the war causing huge
fissures to open in US society as young people rebelled against the horror of
war and being conscripted to fight.
China: from the Great Leap Forward to the market
China’s official image in the 1950s and early 1960s was of a land of smiling
peasants and overjoyed workers, joint leader of the Communist world with the
USSR, steadily moving towards a socialism of peace and plenty. It was an
image carried in thousands of left wing papers across the world.
The US had its own rival image of China. It was of the biggest Red
Menace of them all, a land of organised hate, a society in which hundreds of
millions toiled mindlessly at the command of those at the top, even closer to
the nightmare world of George Orwell’s 1984 than Russia. This image played
a powerful role in US propaganda in support of the war in Vietnam. The US
claimed that China was intent upon expanding its influence south and
destroying freedom. If it succeeded in Vietnam the other countries of south east
Asia would be next, falling like ‘dominoes’ until nowhere in the ‘free world’
was safe.
Neither image accorded with the realities of life for the fifth or more of the
world’s people who lived in China. US propaganda ignored the growing
schism between Russia and China from at least the mid-1950s. By the early
1960s Russia had cut off aid and withdrawn thousands of advisers from China,
and the two countries were denouncing each other’s policies at international
meetings.
Official Chinese propaganda glossed over the class divisions in the
country and the extreme hardship in which most of its people lived. On taking
control of China’s great cities in 1949 the leaders of the People’s Liberation
Army had followed a policy of uniting all classes, including a section of
capitalists, behind a programme aimed at economic reconstruction. In the early
1950s this gave way to a programme of industrialisation, loosely modelled on
that pursued by Stalin in Russia and likewise aimed at accomplishing what
capitalism had done in the West. Many industries had been state-owned under
the Kuomintang regime or been confiscated from their former Japanese
owners. The state now took over most of the rest, but paid their old owners
fixed dividends (so there were still millionaires in ‘Red’ China). The
apparatus of state control was staffed, in the main, by members of the educated
middle classes, with most of the officials of the Kuomintang period left in
place. There was land reform in regions dominated by landlords, but the
better-off peasants were left untouched. The condition of the mass of workers
remained much as before.
These measures produced considerable economic growth—12 percent a
year according to official figures for the years 1954-57. But this did not get
anywhere near the official aim of catching the advanced industrial countries,
and a section of the Chinese leadership around Mao Zedong began to fear that
unless desperate steps were taken China would subside into being one more
stagnating Third World country. In 1958, against the opposition of other leaders
such as the president Liu Shoqi and Deng Xiaoping, they launched a ‘Great
Leap Forward’ aimed at ultra-rapid industrialisation.
Heavy industry was to be made to grow much faster than before by every
district setting out to make its own iron and steel. Millions of new industrial
workers were to be fed by removing individual plots from the peasants and
forcing people into huge ‘People’s Communes’. In 1958 and 1959 it seemed
the ‘leap’ was being made successfully. The official industrial growth rate was
almost 30 percent a year, and across the world enthusiasts for Chinese
Communism hailed the ‘communes’ as the dawn of a new era. In 1960 reality
struck home. China did not have the technical equipment to make the communes
viable, and merely herding the peasants together could not overcome centuries-
old traditions which set one family against another. Grain output dropped
catastrophically and many millions died in famines. The new locally-based
industries were of a low technical level, extremely inefficient and damaged the
overall economy by using up resources. The Great Leap Forward turned into a
disaster for which the mass of people paid a terrible price. Willpower alone
could not overcome centuries of stagnation and the de-industrialisation caused
by imperialism.
The leadership reacted by shunting Mao away from the levers of power
and returning to a more measured approach towards industrialisation. But this
policy was hardly a great success. Industrial output was lower in 1965 than in
1960. While the labour force grew by 15 million a year, the number of new
jobs grew by only half a million, and the 23 million college graduates found it
hard to find meaningful employment.291
As the problems accumulated, the group in the leadership around Mao
Zedong once more felt that only urgent action could break the impasse. This
time they believed they had found an agency to carry it through—the vast
numbers of young people whose hopes were frustrated. In 1966 Mao and a
coterie of supporters, including his wife Jiang Qing and defence minister Lin
Biao, proclaimed the ‘Proletarian Cultural Revolution’.
China, they said, was being held back by the ‘culture’ of those running the
structures of the party and the country. These people had become soft and lazy.
Such tendencies had already led Russia ‘down the capitalist road’ of de-
Stalinisation, and they could drag China back to its old ‘Confucian’ ways. It
was the task of youth to stop this by mass criticism of those obstructing Mao’s
policies. The Mao group shut down all education institutions for six months
and encouraged 11 million college and high school students to carry the
criticism from one region to another on free rail transport.
The ‘Proletarian Cultural Revolution’ was in no sense proletarian and in
no sense a revolution. The workers were expected to keep working while the
students staged mass rallies and travelled the country. Indeed, part of the
message of the ‘Cultural Revolution’ was that workers should abandon
‘capitalistic’ worries like bonus rates and health and safety issues, since these
were ‘economistic’, and ‘Mao Zedong thought’ was sufficient motivation for
anyone. At the same time the students were instructed not to interfere with the
functioning of the military and police apparatus. This was a ‘revolution’
intended to avoid turning the state upside down!
The student ‘Red Guards’ were encouraged to unleash their frustrations not
at institutions, but against individuals who were deemed to have shown
insufficient revolutionary zeal. At the top this meant targeting those who had
disagreed with Mao at the time of the Great Leap Forward. Liu Shaoqi, Deng
Xiaoping and others were forced from office. At the local level it meant
scapegoating low level figures of minimal authority who were thought
somehow to embody ‘old ways’—schoolteachers, writers, journalists, clerks
or actors. The atmosphere of irrational persecution is conveyed vividly in the
memoirs of former ‘Red Guard’ Jung Chang, in Wild Swans, in scenes in the
film Farewell, My Concubine about an Beijing opera performer and victim of
the Cultural Revolution, and in the novel about a group of intellectuals, Stones
of the Wall, by Dai Houying.
But the Cultural Revolution was not just an irrational outburst. The
frustrations which Mao exploited were real enough. And, because of this, Mao
could not keep control of the movement he had initiated. Rival ‘Red Guard’
and ‘Red Rebel’ groups emerged in many towns and many institutions. Some
were manipulated by local state and party apparatuses. But others began to
attract young workers, to raise questions affecting the lives of the mass of
people and, in Shanghai, to get involved in major strikes.
Mao now tried to stop the movement he had initiated only months before,
and called upon Lin Biao’s army to restore order in each locality. It was a
move which prompted some of the students to turn against the whole social
system. A group in Hunan denounced ‘the rule of the new bureaucratic
bourgeoisie’. Others made criticisms which laid the ground for the ‘democracy
wall’ movement of the 1970s.292 Decisive action by the army brought the ‘Red
Guard’ movement to an end, aided by the faith the mass of students still had in
Mao himself. Those who had begun to express their feelings through the
movement, in however distorted a way, now paid a hard price. Millions were
forcibly removed from the cities to undertake backbreaking work in remote
rural areas—one estimate suggests one in ten of Shanghai’s population were
sent out of the city.293
However, the end of mass participation in the Cultural Revolution was not
the end of the turmoil in China. In 1970 Lin Biao, Mao’s designated successor,
suddenly fled the country for Russia amid talk of a failed coup, only for his
aircraft to crash close to the Soviet border. The early part of the 1970s saw
central power concentrated in the hands of Zhou Enlai, who brought back the
previously disgraced Deng Xiaoping as his designated heir. Mao’s wife and
three collaborators (the ‘Gang of Four’) briefly regained control in 1974,
purging Deng again and reverting to the language of the Cultural Revolution.
Huge demonstrations to commemorate the death of Zhou Enlai showed how
little support they had, and they were overthrown and imprisoned after Mao
died in 1976.
Much of the left around the world had enthused at the Cultural Revolution.
In many countries opponents of the US war in Vietnam carried portraits of Mao
Zedong as well as the Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh. The trite sayings in the
Little Red Book of ‘Mao’s thoughts’ were presented as a guide to socialist
activity. Yet in 1972, as more US bombers hit targets in Vietnam than ever
before, Mao greeted US president Nixon in Beijing, and by 1977, under Deng,
China was beginning to embrace the market more furiously than Russia under
Stalin’s successors.
The Western media saw such twists and turns as a result of wild
irrationality. By the late 1970s many of those on the left who had identified
with Maoism in the 1960s agreed, and turned their backs on socialism. A
whole school of ex-Maoist ‘New Philosophers’ emerged in France, who taught
that revolution automatically leads to tyranny and that the revolutionary left are
as bad as the fascist right. Yet there is a simple, rational explanation for the
apparently irrational course of Chinese history over a quarter of a century.
China simply did not have the internal resources to pursue the Stalinist path of
forced industrialisation successfully, however much its rulers starved the
peasants and squeezed the workers. But there were no other easy options after
a century of imperialist plundering. Unable to find rational solutions, the
country’s rulers were tempted by irrational ones.
Chapter 10
The new world disorder
Most who looked at the advanced capitalist countries in the mid-1960s
believed that the system had shaken off the problems of the inter-war years. It
was no longer plagued by ever deeper slumps, endless economic uncertainty
and political polarisation between revolutionary left and fascist right. US
sociologist Daniel Bell proclaimed ‘an end of ideology’. Since the means
were now available for the ‘organisation of production, control of inflation
and maintenance of full employment’, he claimed, ‘politics today is not a
reflection of any internal class division’.294 Bell wrote for Encounter
magazine, which was financed by the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
But even those who hated the CIA could come to very similar conclusions. So
the German-American Marxist Herbert Marcuse wrote that ‘an overriding
interest in the preservation and improvement in the institutional status quo
united the former antagonists (bourgeoisie and proletariat) in the most
advanced areas of contemporary society’.295
It seemed that history, or at least the history of class struggle, had come to
and end—except perhaps in the Third World. It was a notion reformulated,
without any acknowledgement to Bell or Marcuse, three decades later by the
US State Department official Francis Fukuyama.
Yet the period between the mid-1960s and early 1990s was marked by a
series of social upheavals, sudden economic crises, bitter strikes, and the
collapse of one of the world’s great military blocs. Far from coming to an end,
history speeded up.
There were three great turning points in the second half of the 20th century
—in 1968, in 1973-75 and in 1989. Together they demolished the political,
ideological and economic edifice of the Cold War era.
1968: the sound of freedom flashing
The year 1968 is usually referred to as ‘the year of student revolt’. It was
indeed a year which saw student protests, demonstrations and occupations
across the world—in West Berlin, New York and Harvard, Warsaw and
Prague, London and Paris, Mexico City and Rome. But there was much more to
the year than this. It witnessed the high point of revolt by black Americans, the
biggest ever blow to US military prestige (in Vietnam), resistance to Russian
troops (in Czechoslovakia), the biggest general strike in world history (in
France), the beginning of a wave of workers’ struggles that were to shake
Italian society for seven years, and the start of what became known as the
‘Troubles’ in Northern Ireland. The student struggles were a symptom of the
collision of wider social forces, although they were to feed back into and
influence some of these.
The eruptions of 1968 were a shock because the societies in which they
occurred had seemed so stable. McCarthyism had destroyed the left which had
existed in the US in the 1930s, and the country’s trade union leaders were
notoriously bureaucratic and conservative. Czechoslovakia was the most
prosperous of the Eastern European countries and had been among the least
affected by the upheavals of 1956. France had been firmly under the dictatorial
rule of de Gaulle for ten years, the left was doing badly in elections, and the
unions were weak. Governments came and went in Italy, but they were always
led by Christian Democrats, who relied on the Catholic church to herd people
to the polls on their behalf.
Much of the stability was due to the sustained economic growth these
countries had experienced. Yet this very growth created forces that undermined
the stability, and these forces split the political and ideological structures wide
open in 1968.
In the US at the beginning of the long boom the majority of the black
population were where they had been at the end of slavery—they were
sharecroppers in the rural South, where the local state and white racists used
the gun, the bullwhip and the noose to compel them to accept their inferior
position. The boom speeded up the movement to the cities to seek work in
industry. By 1960 three quarters of blacks were city dwellers. Sheer
concentration of numbers began to create the confidence to stand up to the
racists and the state. In 1955 the refusal of one woman, Rosa Parks, to sit in the
segregated area at the back of a bus ignited a massive bus boycott that shook
the old power structures of Montgomery, Alabama. In 1965, 1966 and 1967
there were black uprisings in the Northern cities like Los Angeles, Newark and
Detroit. In 1968 virtually every ghetto in the country went up in smoke after the
assassination of black leader Martin Luther King, and a large proportion of
young blacks began to identify with the Black Panther Party, which called for
armed self defence and preached revolution.
The ability of the existing order to stabilise itself in France and Italy in the
late 1940s—and to sustain itself in fascist Spain and Portugal—had depended
on the fact that a large proportion of the people of these countries were still
small farmers, who could be bribed or intimidated into supporting the status
quo. The ideological expression of this was the hold the highly conservative
Catholic church exercised in many regions. The long boom changed this. By
1968 very large numbers of men and women from peasant backgrounds were
concentrated in factories and other large workplaces across the countries of
southern Europe. At first they tended to bring their rural prejudices with them,
opposing unions or supporting conservative Catholic unions. But they faced the
same conditions as older groups of workers who remembered the struggles of
the 1930s and the great strikes at the end of the war—the relentless pressure to
work harder, the bullying of foremen and managers, and the pressure on wages
from rising prices. In 1968 and 1969 they were to fuse into a new and
powerful force to challenge the system.
The stability of Czechoslovakia in the mid-1950s was also the result of a
booming economy. Growth of around 7 percent a year had given a feeling of
self assurance to the ruling bureaucracy, while allowing substantial increases
in real wages. The rate of growth slumped in the early 1960s, leading to a
build-up of frustrations at every level of society and to splits in the ruling
bureaucracy. Leading figures in the party forced the president and party
secretary Novotny to resign. Intellectuals and students seized the opportunity to
express themselves freely for the first time in 20 years. The whole apparatus of
censorship collapsed and the police suddenly appeared powerless to crush
dissent. The students formed a free students’ union, workers began to vote out
state-appointed union leaders, ministers were grilled on television about their
policies, and there was public discussion about the horrors of the Stalin era.
This was too much for Russia’s rulers. In August 1968 they sent massive
numbers of troops into the country and dragged key government figures off to
Moscow under arrest.
They expected to be able to crush the dissent overnight, but the immediate
effect was to deepen and widen it. There was limited physical resistance to the
Russian tanks, but enormous passive opposition. Russia was forced to allow
the Czechoslovakian government to return home with a promise to bring the
dissent under control. It was nine months, interspersed with demonstrations
and strikes, before this promise was fulfilled. Eventually Russia succeeded in
imposing a puppet government which silenced overt opposition by driving
people from their jobs and in some cases imprisoning them. Stalinist state
capitalism was to run Czechoslovakia for another 20 years.
Yet the ideological damage to the Stalinist system was enormous.
Internationally the events revived the doubts people on the left had felt in 1956.
Most of the Communist parties of Western Europe condemned the Russian
occupation, if only because doing so made it easier to collaborate with social
democratic and middle class political forces at home. Among young people
moving to the left it became common to denounce ‘imperialism, East and
West’. In Eastern Europe, including Czechoslovakia, the membership of the
ruling parties became less and less bound by any real ideological commitment
—joining the party was a career move, no more and no less.
Even the problems which the US faced in Vietnam were to some extent a
product of the long boom. It was the Tet Offensive which pushed the war to the
centre of the world stage in 1968. But Tet was not an outright defeat for US
forces. The US boasted at the time that it had retaken control of the cities—
even if, as a general admitted in one case, ‘We had to destroy the city in order
to save it.’ Tet represented the turning point in the war because it persuaded
key sections of big business that the US simply could not afford the cost of
maintaining control of the country. The US was spending no more on the war
than it had in Korea. But the intervening boom had seen the rise of Japanese
and West German capitalism, and the US could not afford to meet the challenge
of their economic competition as well as pay the cost of a land war in Vietnam.
As it was, the war gutted President Johnson’s scheme for a ‘Great Society’
programme of welfare expenditure which he hoped would make his reputation
and provide long term stability for US society.
Finally, in all the advanced capitalist countries the long boom had led to a
massive increase in the number of students. Everywhere the state sponsored a
huge expansion of higher education as it sought to increase the competitiveness
of its national capitalism. In Britain, where there had been only 69,000
students at the outbreak of the Second World War, there were almost 300,000
by 1964. The growth also produced a qualitative change in the make-up of the
student population. Whereas in the past it had been drawn overwhelmingly
from the ruling class and its hangers-on, it came to be composed mainly of
children of the middle class and, to a lesser extent, of workers. The colleges in
which the mass of students studied were increasingly large, patterned on
uniform designs and concentrated the students in much the same way as
workers were concentrated in workplaces. Student protesters in Berkeley,
California, complained of ‘knowledge factories’.
Students came together in these places for only three or four years, before
moving on to very different class destinations in wider society. But the
conditions in which they found themselves could create a community of feeling
and interest, capable of driving them to collective action. Something else could
have the same effect—the ideological tensions in wider society. These existed
in a concentrated form in a milieu in which thousands of young people—as
students of sociology, literature, history or economics—were expected to
absorb and articulate ideological themes.
It meant that issues raised in wider society could be explosive in the
colleges. So, for example, the student struggles in Berlin grew out of the police
killing a protester during a visit by the despotic Shah of Iran; in the US grew
out of horror at the war against Vietnam and in solidarity with black struggles;
in Poland grew out of protests against the imprisonment of dissidents; in
Czechoslovakia as part of the opposition to the Russian occupation.
Struggles which began over student issues rapidly generalised to tackle the
whole character of society. This was shown most dramatically in France. The
authorities reacted to small-scale student protests over conditions by shutting
the whole of Paris University and sending in the police. Growing numbers of
students, horrified by the police violence, joined in the protests until the police
were temporarily driven from the whole Left Bank of the city on the ‘night of
the barricades’ (10 May). The student movement came to symbolise successful
opposition to the whole order over which de Gaulle reigned, with its
authoritarianism and willingness to use armed police to break strikes and
protests. Responding to pressure from below, the leaders of the rival union
federations called for a one day general strike on 13 May—and were
astonished by the response. The next day, emboldened by the success of the
general strike, young workers initiated an occupation of the Sud Aviation plant
in Nantes. Other workers copied their example, and within two days the entire
country was undergoing a repetition of the occupations of 1936—but on a much
bigger scale. For a fortnight the government was paralysed, and much of the
discussion in those parts of the media which continued to appear was of the
‘revolution’ that was occurring. In desperation de Gaulle fled secretly to the
generals commanding the French armed forces in Germany, only to be told his
job was to bring the agitation to an end. That he was able eventually to do so
was only because promises of wage increases and a general election were
enough to persuade the unions and, above all, the Communist Party to push for
a return to work.
Even before the May events the spread of student struggles internationally
was leading to a new popularity for the language of revolution. But until May
such talk still tended to be framed by the ideas of people like Herbert Marcuse,
with their dismissal of workers. The characteristic slogans spoke of ‘student
power’. May changed that. From then on there was a growing tendency to make
a connection between what was happening and the events of 1848, 1871, 1917
and 1936—and in some cases with what had happened in 1956. Marxist ideas,
marginalised in mainstream intellectual life in the West for two decades or
more, suddenly became fashionable. And 30 years later ageing intellectuals
right across the Western world were still enthusing over or bemoaning the
impact of ‘the sixties’.
It was not only culture in the narrow intellectual sense which felt the
influence of 1968. So did many elements of wider ‘mass’ and ‘youth’ culture.
There was a challenging of the stereotypes with which young people had been
brought up. There were radical changes to dress and hairstyles, with the wide-
scale adoption of fashions previously associated only with ‘underground’
minorities. The use of recreational drugs (mainly marijuana, amphetamines and
LSD) became widespread. More importantly, a growing number of Hollywood
films challenged rather than propagated the American Dream, and some pop
music began to take up themes other than sexual desire and romantic love.
In the US the initial ‘movements’—the civil rights and black liberation
movement, the anti-war movement, and the student movement—gave birth to
others. They inspired Native Americans to take up the struggle against their
oppression, and gays in New York to fight back against raids on their clubs—
founding the Gay Liberation Front. The experience of the movements also led
thousands of women to challenge the inferior role allotted to them in US
society—and, all too frequently, in the movements as well. They founded the
Women’s Liberation Movement, with demands questioning the oppression
women had suffered since the birth of class society, and found an echo among
women who had no direct connection with the movement. The fact that the
majority of women were beginning to be part of the employed workforce for
life and relished the independence it gave them was finding an expression.
The new impasse
The wave of radicalisation did not end with 1968. The biggest student protests
in the US came in 1970. Colleges throughout the country were occupied in the
week after National Guard troops shot dead students at Kent State University
in Ohio for protesting against President Nixon’s extension of the Vietnam War
into Cambodia. In Greece the student movement erupted in 1973, with the
occupation of the polytechnic in the centre of Athens shaking the military junta
which had ruled the country for six years, and helped to ensure its collapse
seven months later. In West Germany the universities continued to stand out for
several years as ghettos of left wing (mainly Maoist) agitation in the midst of a
generally apolitical country.
However, there was an important shift in several countries after 1968. The
students ceased being the centre of left wing opposition. In Italy the workers’
movement became central after the ‘hot autumn’ of 1969, when metal workers
occupied their factories over wage contracts. In Spain, too, the workers’
movement played a central role from late 1970 onwards, so weakening the
regime in the last years of Franco’s life that his heirs rushed through
‘democratic’ reforms almost the moment he died in 1975. In Britain activity by
trade unionists, much of it in defiance of their union leaders, so damaged the
Conservative government of Edward Heath that he called an election on the
question of ‘who runs the country?’ early in 1974—and lost.
Students had sometimes been able ignite struggles which involved
workers, but how the struggles ended depended on the workers’ organisations.
This was shown clearly in France in May 1968, when the unions and the
Communist Party succeeded in bringing the general strike to an end against the
objections of the best known student leaders. It was shown again in Italy,
Britain and Spain during 1975-76. The Christian Democrats in Italy, the Tories
in Britain and Franco in Spain were unable to curtail the workers’ struggles by
themselves. Governments could only do so by signing agreements with the
union leaders and workers’ parties—called the ‘historic compromise’ in Italy,
the ‘Social Contract’ in Britain and the ‘Pact of Moncloa’ in Spain.
The effect in each case was to curtail the action of workers just as the long
boom was coming to an end—lowering people’s guard just as a knockout
punch was about to be directed at them.
There was another area of the world where the student radicalism of the
late 1960s led to a wave of workers’ struggles in the 1970s—the southern
‘cone’ of Latin America. The late 1960s saw a near uprising in the Argentinian
city of Cordoba,296 and a wave of land occupations which challenged the
Christian Democrat president of Chile. In both cases the drive for change from
below was channelled in constitutional directions.
In Argentina it became centred around the demand for the return from exile
of the post-war dictator, Peron. He had ruled at a time when high world prices
for Argentina’s agricultural exports had translated into relatively high wages
and welfare provision for its workers. People believed that his return would
bring back the good times. It was a message repeated by rival Peron supporters
of the left and right—and even by a powerful urban guerrilla organisation, the
Montoneros. In fact his eventual return resulted in no gains for workers, but
unleashed an onslaught by the right and by the military for which the left was
unprepared. After Peron’s death the military felt strong enough to take power
directly into its own hands. A whole generation of left wing activists,
numbering tens of thousands, were murdered or ‘disappeared’.
In Chile the parliamentary Socialist Party was the beneficiary of the new
militancy. One of its leaders, Salvador Allende, was elected president in 1970,
and the right wing majority in parliament agreed to him assuming office in
return for a constitutional guarantee that he would not disturb the military chain
of command. Important US business interests were not happy at this, and two
years into Allende’s term of office they were joined by major sections of the
Chilean ruling class. There was an attempt to drive him from office in the
autumn of 1972 through a ‘bosses’ strike’ spearheaded by lorry owners. It was
thwarted by workers seizing their factories and setting up cordones—similar
to the workers’ councils of 1917 and 1956—to link the factories. An attempted
coup in June 1973 failed due to splits in the armed forces and massive street
protests. But the Communist Party and main sectors of the Socialist Party told
people to wind down the cordones and trust in the ‘constitutional’ traditions of
the army. Allende brought generals, including Augusto Pinochet, into his
government, believing this would placate the right and maintain order. In
September Pinochet staged a coup, bombarded Allende in the presidential
palace and murdered thousands of worker activists. While the workers’
movement was being lulled to sleep in Europe by its own leaders, it was
drowned in blood in southern Latin America.
The flame lit in 1968 was to flare up one more time in Europe. Portugal
had been a dictatorship with fascist characteristics since the late 1920s. But by
the mid-1970s it was losing the war to control its African colonies. In April
1974 a coup overthrew the dictator Caetano, replacing him with a conservative
general, Spinola, who was backed by the country’s major monopolies and
committed to a negotiated settlement to the wars.
The collapse of the dictatorship unleashed a wave of struggle. The great
shipyards of Lisnave and Setnave were occupied. Bakers, postal workers and
airport workers struck. Many of the army captains who had taken the risk of
organising the coup were much more radical than Spinola and wanted an
immediate end to the wars, while Spinola wanted to drag them out until the
liberation movements agreed peace terms which would protect Portuguese
business interests. The only properly organised underground party was the
Communist Party. Its leaders made a deal with Spinola to end the strikes
(earning the distrust of some of the most powerful groups of workers in the
Lisbon area), joined the government and attempted to infiltrate middle class
supporters into positions of influence in the armed forces and the media. Its
aim was to lift itself up by balancing between the workers and the generals
until it could establish a regime along the lines of those in Eastern Europe after
the war.
It was a manoeuvre that could not possibly work. The Communist Party
could not stop the militancy of the Lisbon workers and disaffection in the
armed forces leading to the growth of forces to its left any more than it could it
calm the panic within Western capitalism at the revolutionary events on its
doorstep.
Two unsuccessful attempts at right wing coups led to Spinola losing office,
and to a further radicalisation among workers and within the ranks of the army.
Backed by the CIA and the social democratic governments of Western Europe,
the right organised a series of near-risings in rural northern Portugal. The army
captains who exercised effective military power swung from one political
option to another. Then, in November 1975, a senior officer with social
democrat backing succeeded in provoking some of the left wing officers into a
half-hearted attempt to take power, and used it as an excuse to march several
hundred disciplined troops on Lisbon to disarm the disaffected regiments. The
Communist Party, which had appeared so powerful only a few weeks earlier—
when an officer close to it held the premiership—made no attempt to organise
working class resistance. A revolution which had deeply worried the leaders
of capitalism in Europe and America in the summer of 1975 accepted defeat in
the autumn with barely a murmur.
A hard rain
The long boom came to an abrupt end in the autumn of 1973, as Western
economies went into recession simultaneously for the first time since the 1930s
and unemployment doubled. This was enough to produce panic in government
and business circles everywhere. Mainstream economists had never been able
to explain how the slump of the 1930s had happened, and none of them could
be sure they were not facing a similar situation.
In the 1950s and 1960s they had convinced themselves that slumps were no
longer possible because they could apply the prescriptions of John Maynard
Keynes. Business cycles were a thing of the past, the author of the world’s
best-selling economic textbook, Nobel prize-winner Paul Samuelson, had
assured them in 1970. But when they tried to apply Keynesian remedies to the
recession they did not work. The only effect was to increase inflation while
leaving unemployment untouched. By 1976 they had abandoned such methods
amid panic about the danger of escalating inflation. Economists and political
journalists switched overnight to a belief in the completely ‘free’ market,
unconstrained by state intervention—a theory previously preached only by a
few isolated prophets such as Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman. Such a
mass conversion of intellectuals had not been seen since the days when
theologians changed their ‘beliefs’ on the say-so of princes.
The popularity of the prophets of the free market could not, however,
restore unemployment levels to those of the long boom. Nor could it prevent
another recession at the beginning of the 1980s, doubling unemployment again
and affecting even wider areas of the world than that of 1974-76.
One popular explanation for the crises of 1974-76 and 1980-82 blamed the
sudden increases in the price of oil after the Arab-Israeli war of October 1973
and the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war of 1980. But a fresh crisis broke at the
beginning of the 1990s, at a time of falling oil prices. Another explanation
claimed that the crisis of 1974-76 resulted from the impact of rising wages on
profits. But this could not explain the later crises, since wages in the world’s
single most important economy, the US, fell steadily after the mid-1970s.297
Something more fundamental in the system had changed, turning the ‘golden
age’ into a ‘leaden age’. The US had been able to afford massive arms
spending at the time of the Korean War, absorbing perhaps 20 percent of its
total output and equal to half the surplus available for investment. This had
provided markets for its own industries and for exports from states such as
Japan, which spent very little on arms. But by the time of the Vietnam War
competition from such countries meant the US could not afford its old level of
military output. It still produced massive quantities of weaponry, but the
proportion of output this absorbed was probably about a third of that at the
time of the Korean War. This was simply not enough to ward off recurrent and
deepening world recessions, even if they were not yet on the scale of the 1930s
slump.298
This did not bring all economic growth to an end in the advanced
countries. But growth was much slower and more uneven than previously, and
the cycle of boom and slump had returned with a vengeance. Average output
per head in the 1980s grew at less than half the rate of the early 1960s.
Unemployment reached levels virtually unimaginable in the long boom,
commonly staying above 10 percent for years at a time, and rising close to 20
percent in places such as Ireland and Spain. Lower rates in the US in the late
1980s and late 1990s were driven by welfare cuts which forced people to take
jobs at poverty wages—the poorest 10 percent earning 25 percent less than the
equivalent group in Britain.299
Generalised job insecurity became a feature everywhere. By the 1990s
mainstream politicians were deriding the idea that people could have ‘jobs for
life’. Yet that phrase had summed up what most people took for granted through
the long boom. Of course, people changed jobs as some industries grew and
others contracted. But except in a few ‘declining industries’, workers usually
did so voluntarily, responding to the pull of better prospects, not the push of
redundancy. Now the push became the norm, and opinion polls suggested fear
of it weighed on the minds of about half the working population.
Capitalism is a more dynamic form of class society than any before in
history. Its dynamism, its ever-changing character, is as typical of a slump as of
a boom. Some firms go out of business while others prosper at their expense.
Some industries contract while others expand. Even in the worst slump there
would be growth sectors—such as pawn-brokers buying up the goods of the
most desperate and security services protecting the wealth of the rich.
The dynamism remained in the ‘leaden age’, but instead of offering the
mass of people improved lives, as in the long boom, it threatened to snatch
what they had achieved in the past. Whole industries disappeared, and towns
were reduced to wastelands. Welfare benefits were cut to the levels of 50
years earlier—or even abolished in some US states. Meanwhile, a new brand
of hard right politicians known as ‘Thatcherites’ or ‘neo-liberals’ toasted the
unleashing of ‘enterprise’, and found an echo among a layer of social
democratic politicians who treated a return to the orthodoxies of 19th century
politics as evidence of ‘modernity’.
The shift to the right had its impact on sections of the radical left,
demoralised by the defeats of the mid-1970s—and in some cases by learning
the truth about China and the bloody regime established by the pro-Chinese
Khmer Rouge in Cambodia. Some drew the conclusion that the whole
revolutionary enterprise had been misconceived. Some believed they had been
too severe in their criticism of parliamentary reformism. Some simply
concluded that the class struggle was a thing of the past.
In fact there were some very big and sometimes violent class
confrontations in the 1980s, as workers tried to prevent the decimation of jobs
in old established industries—the struggles by steel workers in France and
Belgium, the year long strike of over 150,000 miners in Britain and a strike of
similar length by 5,000 British print workers, a five day general strike in
Denmark, public sector strikes in Holland and British Columbia, and a one day
general strike in Spain.
But, by and large, these struggles were defeated, and one legacy of defeat
was a growing belief that ‘old fashioned’ methods of class struggle could not
win. This led a layer of working class activists to place their hopes once more
in the promises of parliamentary politicians. It also encouraged left wing
intellectuals to question further the very notions of class and class struggle.
They embraced an intellectual fashion called ‘postmodernism’, which claimed
any interpretation of reality was as valid as any other, that there was no
objective basis for notions such as class, and that any attempt to change the
way society operates would be ‘totalitarian’, since it involved trying to impose
a total conception of the world on others. Postmodernists rejected notions of
struggling to change society just as the dangerous instability of society became
ever more pronounced.
The crisis of state capitalism
More governments fell from power in 1989-90 than at any time in Europe since
1917-18 and, before that, 1848. The Eastern bloc was suddenly no more, and
by 1991 the pillar which had supported it, the USSR, had crumbled as well.
Despite postmodernist and ‘post-Marxist’ claims that such things were no
longer possible, they had been pulled down by a combination of economic
crisis and class struggle. If some on the left did not see this, it was because of
their own illusions, not material realities. For the entire period since 1968 had
been marked by deepening crises and repeated upsurges of struggle in the
Eastern bloc.
The Russian occupation had succeeded in ‘normalising’ the situation in
Czechoslovakia in 1968-69. But events in neighbouring Poland soon showed
how widespread and deep the malaise had become. The regime had managed
to crush the student movement of 1968, and attempted to use the police in a
similar way against thousands of workers who occupied the giant shipyards in
Gdansk (Danzig before the war) and Szczecin (Stettin) in 1970-71 in protest at
price rises. The police killed a large number of workers. But solidarity strikes
elsewhere forced out the regime’s head, Gomulka, and his successor, Gierek,
withdrew the price increases. He borrowed from Western banks, the economy
boomed, and Western journalists wrote of a ‘Polish miracle’. But increasing
integration with Western markets meant that Poland was hit by the crisis in
those markets in the mid-1970s. The government again tried to raise prices and
launched police attacks on protestors.
The regime was not able to bury the memory of the workers’ actions this
time, as it had after 1956-57 and 1970-71. Amid a sense of deepening crisis a
group of intellectuals defied harassment and established a Workers’ Defence
Committee and an underground paper, Robotnik (Worker), with some 20,000
readers. The once-totalitarian regime remained in power, but it could no longer
impose totalitarianism.
Its weakness eventually showed in the summer of 1980. A renewed attempt
to impose price increases led to further strikes and the occupation of the
Gdansk shipyards. A movement grew out of the occupation that recalled the
Hungarian workers’ councils of 1956. But it had a life of 16 months, not three
or four weeks.
The movement proclaimed itself an independent trade union, Solidarnosc
(Solidarity). But in the year and a quarter of its legal existence it was
something more than a trade union. Established by a conference of delegates
from 3,500 factories and soon claiming ten million members, it represented an
alternative power to that of the government. It became the focus for the
aspirations of everyone sick of the old society, its very existence a challenge to
the regime. Yet its leaders committed themselves deliberately to avoid
overthrowing the government. They accepted the view of sympathetic
intellectuals that they should aim at a ‘self limiting revolution’. They made an
assumption very similar to that of the Allende government in Chile: if the
workers’ movement promised it would not threaten the state, the state would
tolerate the workers’ movement. As a consequence, Solidarnosc suffered a fate
similar to the Chilean movement. In mid-December 1981 the military leader
Jaruzelski declared martial law, jammed the country’s telecommunications
systems, arrested the entire Solidarnosc leadership and used troops against
workers who resisted. Confused and demoralised, the workers’ organisations
were broken.300
However, the breaking of the Polish workers’ movement could not remove
the underlying forces which had given rise to it. Rates of economic growth in
the Eastern bloc were now no higher than in the bigger Western economies.
What is more, the Reagan government in the US was embarking on a new arms
build-up (with the stationing of cruise and Pershing missiles in Europe) which
the Russian government wanted to match. But the resources simply did not
exist to meet the demands this put on the economy. The state capitalist regimes
had to reform or risk class confrontation and internal collapse.
Russia’s ruler in the early 1980s, Andropov, had first-hand knowledge of
the challenge a workers’ movement could pose. He had been Russian
ambassador in Hungary in 1956 and head of the KGB during the rise of
Solidarnosc in 1980-81. He wanted to prevent the possibility of a similar
challenge arising in the USSR itself and began promoting people he thought
would reform Russia. Foremost among these was Mikhail Gorbachev.
When Gorbachev took over as head of the USSR in 1985 he seemed all-
powerful—and, when he spoke in 1987 and 1988 about the need for openness
(glasnost) and reform, he seemed popular, too. But when he lost power in
1991 he had a popularity rating close to zero. His call for reform had created
confusion in the police apparatus of the USSR and raised people’s hopes so
that they began to challenge the exploitation and oppression of the previous 60
years. But his commitment to do no more than restructure the state capitalist
organisation of production prevented him finding the resources necessary to
satisfy those hopes. By the end of the decade the economic stagnation of the
early 1980s had become economic contraction.
The spring of 1988 saw the first mass protests since the 1920s which were
not immediately crushed by the police—first in Armenia and then in the Baltic
states, movements of minority nationalities demanding greater rights.
Gorbachev did not have the strength to repress them as his predecessors would
have done. But he did not have the means to buy them off either. Vicious but
incomplete repression gave way to half-hearted concessions. It was the classic
formula by which regimes have often helped ignite revolt.
Gorbachev made moves to stabilise his position by reliance on
conservative forces in the summer of 1989 and the spring of 1991. On each
occasion he was stopped in his tracks by huge miners’ strikes which came
close to shutting off the country’s energy supplies. In particular, the strike of
summer 1989 showed more than a passing resemblance to the first great
workers’ protests in Poland. Gorbachev had to make concessions to the
various opposition movements if the whole regime was not to risk being
engulfed from below, and as he did so his own power to control events
evaporated.
The impact was devastating for the regimes installed in Eastern Europe 45
years earlier. The various rulers had lost their ultimate fall-back position in the
face of revolt—the threat of Russian intervention. Already, a year earlier, the
hard man of Poland, Jaruzelski, had settled a series of miners’ strikes by
agreeing to negotiate with the leaders of Solidarnosc—although the
underground organisation was a shadow of what it had been in 1980-81. In the
summer of 1989 Kadar’s successors in Hungary agreed on similar ‘round
table’ negotiations with the country’s considerably weaker dissident groups.
In September and October a wave of demonstrations swept East Germany,
and its government conceded negotiations and began to demolish the Berlin
Wall which cut it off from West Germany as a token of its sincerity. Later in
November it was the turn of Husak in Czechoslovakia to fall, amid enormous
street demonstrations and a one hour general strike. Bulgaria followed suit. An
attempt by Romania’s dictator to resist the wave of change by shooting down
demonstrators led to a spontaneous uprising in the capital, Bucharest, and his
execution by a firing squad under the command of his own generals. In six
months the political map of half of Europe had been redrawn. The only
Stalinist regime left in Eastern Europe was Albania, and this collapsed early in
1991 after a general strike.
No imperial power could avoid being scathed by such an upheaval in its
empire. The national movements inside the USSR felt increasingly confident,
and the divisions within the ruling group grew ever wider and its control over
society ever more precarious. Gorbachev made a last attempt to take a hard
line against the opposition currents, only to be thwarted in the spring of 1991
by a second great miners’ strike and a huge demonstration in Moscow. That
summer, conservative forces in his government attempted to take a hard line
without him. They used troops in Moscow to stage a coup, and held Gorbachev
under house arrest. Other military units refused to back them and, after a stand
off, power fell into the hands of a group of reformers around Boris Yeltsin,
president of the Russian republic and former party boss in the industrial city of
Sverdlovsk. Yeltsin agreed on the formal dissolution of the links between the
national republics, and the USSR was no more.
The upheavals of 1989-91 were on a much greater scale than those which
shook Eastern Europe in 1953, 1956, 1968 and 1980-81. Yet there was a sense
in which the changes which occurred were not as fundamental as those that
began to occur on the previous occasions, especially in 1956 and 1980-81—
for the leadership of the movements of 1989-91 went to people determined to
avoid any glimmer of workers’ power. People who had risen through the old
ruling bureaucracies moved, at decisive moments, to align themselves with
groups of dissident intellectuals around a programme of limited reform—and
so pre-empt the possibility of real revolution. They followed a strategy of what
the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci had called ‘passive revolution’—pushing
through change from above in order to prevent it happening from below.
In each case it involved agreeing with the dissidents on programmes which
combined various elements—a greater opening to the world market,
abandonment of the old command economy, a move to relatively free
parliamentary elections, and a new stress on nationalism. As sections of the
old official media and former dissidents repeated the same message, the mass
of workers were persuaded that the market and democracy were natural twins
and could satisfy their aspirations. In the atmosphere of 1989-91 it was
difficult for anyone who argued otherwise to gain a hearing, for the pre-
emptive moves from above kept class movements by workers to a minimum.
The great political changes which occurred were a result of class struggle,
but it was deflected class struggle that did not find expression in the throwing
up of mass democratic organisations of the exploited classes on the lines of
workers’ councils. They were political revolutions, more akin to what
happened in France in 1830 than to the great social revolutions of the past, a
fact demonstrated by the way the same people ran the major industries and
banks after the changes as before.
Shock waves from the collapse
The crisis in the Eastern bloc was part of a much wider crisis affecting all
sorts of countries which had adopted the state capitalist model. Nowhere did it
seem capable of providing the high growth rates of earlier periods. At the
same time it cut off national industries from the new industrial innovations—
especially those connected with microchip technology and computer software
—being pioneered, on the basis of enormous investment, by the industrial
giants of the US and Japan.
Across Asia, Africa and Latin America, bureaucrats and politicians who
had made their careers sponsoring versions of state capitalism switched over
to praise ‘free’ markets and make deals with Western multinationals. Congress
governments in India, the former Maoist movement which won a civil war in
Ethiopia, the Algerian regime and the successors to Nasser in Egypt all
followed this path to a greater or lesser degree. In the vanguard of the new
approach was Deng Xiaoping’s China, where adoration of the market and
profit-making went hand in hand with formal adherence to the cult of Mao.
Most Third World governments showed their commitment to the new
approach by signing up to the ‘structural adjustment programmes’ of the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). There is little evidence that
these could overcome the problems of low growth rates and poverty. Some 76
countries implemented adjustment programmes designed by the World Bank on
‘free market’ criteria in the 1980s. Only a handful recorded better growth or
inflation rates than in previous decades. Of 19 countries which carried through
‘intense adjustment’, only four ‘consistently improved their performance in the
1980s’.301 In 1990 some 44 percent of Latin America’s population was living
below the poverty line according to the United Nations economic commission
for the region, which concluded there had been ‘a tremendous step backwards
in the material standard of living of the Latin American and Caribbean
population in the 1980s’.302 In Africa more than 55 percent of the rural
population was considered to be living in absolute poverty by 1987.303
What happened in Eastern Europe and the former USSR in the 1990s was
just as devastating. The ‘economic miracles’ promised by the reformers did not
take place. In 1999 only two countries, Poland and Slovenia, had a higher
output than in 1989. The Czech Republic and Hungary were both slightly
poorer than ten years before. The economies of Bulgaria, Lithuania and Russia
had shrunk by 40 percent or more.303a
The cold statistics translated into the destruction of the hopes of millions.
Most people in the major Russian cities like Moscow and St Petersburg
became dependent on what they could grow on small allotments and preserve
to supplement meagre supplies of bread and potatoes. Whole communities in
arctic regions lived in fear of the power failing each winter. Miners and steel
workers were not paid for months at a time, health services fell apart, diseases
like tuberculosis became common and life expectancy fell.
Circumstances were a little better in the northern belt of Eastern Europe.
But even in the Czech Republic and Hungary living standards were lower than
in the late 1980s: there were more goods in the shops, but few people with the
money to buy them. East Germany, incorporated into the German Federal
Republic, continued to have unemployment rates of 20 percent and higher. In
south east Europe, in Bulgaria, Romania and Albania, conditions were as bad
as in Russia. In the southern belt of the former USSR they were much worse.
No wonder the optimism among many intellectuals in 1989 had turned to
despair by the late 1990s. The famed Czech poet Miroslav Holub went so far
as to say, ‘If we knew that this was the price we would have to pay, then we
would gladly have put up with not having our work printed and not selling our
paintings’.304 The Eastern European country which suffered most was that
which had maintained its independence from the USSR all through the Cold
War—Yugoslavia. The Western powers no longer considered it worthwhile to
provide loans on favourable terms as a counterbalance to Russian influence in
the region. The IMF imposed a debt repayment programme which halved living
standards in two years and produced astronomical levels of unemployment in
the poorer parts of the country, and a series of bloody civil wars resulted as
different political figures tried to maintain their own positions by setting
national groups against one another while Western powers intervened to
bolster those most friendly to them.
There was one area of the world in which the enthusiasts for the market
placed particular pride—east Asia. In its World Development Report of 1991
the World Bank spoke of ‘the remarkable achievements of the east Asian
economies’, and noted ‘various degrees of reform’ in China, India, Indonesia
and Korea being ‘followed by improvements in economic performance’.305
Samuel Brittan of the Financial Times in Britain reassured his readers,
‘Someone who wants to cheer up should look, not backwards to the Great
Depression, but to the developing countries of eastern Asia which have
contracted out of the world slowdown’.306
The hollowness of such optimism hit home in 1997, when an economic
crisis which began in Thailand swept through the entire region—pushing
Indonesia into a slump on the scale of the 1930s and forcing South Korea,
Malaysia and Hong Kong into deep recession. In the course of 1998 this
ignited a sudden crisis in Russia and destabilised the biggest economy in Latin
America, Brazil. Programmes drawn up by the IMF to deal with the crisis
were bitterly criticised as likely to make things worse by its own former
luminaries such as Jeffrey Sachs.
The Chinese economy did experience rapid growth through most of the
1980s and 1990s as a result of reform of the agricultural price system in the
late 1970s which involved a massive one-off transfer of resources from the
state to the peasantry. There was a rapid growth in food output for a number of
years, which in turn provided the base for a range of light industries to
develop, catering for both the domestic and world markets. According to the
official figures, total industrial output trebled.
But the growth was incredibly uneven. Some coastal regions underwent
massive industrialisation and urbanisation while vast inland regions stagnated
or even regressed. There were tens of millions of new jobs in industry, but 200
million people flooded from the countryside to the towns in the hope of filling
them. Rationalisation of the old heavy industries involved slashing their
workforces and scrapping minimal forms of welfare provision. Wild
fluctuations in growth rates saw sharp booms with rapidly rising prices giving
way to periods of stagnation. Attempts to break out of these cyclical downturns
by selling more on the world market threatened a classic crisis of
overproduction every time the world economy slowed down or slumped.
This combination threatened to produce massive social convulsions, as
was shown vividly in 1989. Only a few months before the political collapse in
Eastern Europe the Chinese state itself came close to breaking down. Student
demands for greater democracy became the focus for the grievances of wide
sections of people, culminating in the famous demonstration in Beijing’s
Tiananmen Square, but also in dozens of other cities and industrial centres. For
several days the regime was paralysed, seeming to have difficulty finding
soldiers prepared to bring the demonstrations to an end, before it used tanks to
crush the protests.
Tiananmen Square was not the first occasion a regime that combined state
capitalist characteristics with a market orientation had faced a social
explosion. Egypt had experienced a wave of strikes, demonstrations and
revolts in its 13 main cities early in 1977—the biggest wave of social unrest
since the nationalist revolt against Britain in 1919. In Algeria in 1988 a wave
of strikes turned into a near-insurrection as young people fought the police for
control of the streets, and forced the regime to concede freedom of the press
and permission for political opponents to return from exile. In South Korea in
1987 huge militant demonstrations by students and sections of the middle class
shook the military regime, forcing it concede a degree of liberalisation—to be
followed in 1988 by a series of major strikes which were settled by double
digit wage increases.
All of these social explosions showed certain similarities with the events
of 1989-90 in Eastern Europe. They demonstrated that neither state capitalism
nor the transition from state capitalism to some sort of market system could
prevent the workforces created by industrial growth rebelling—and drawing
behind them many other layers of society.
Islam, reform and revolution
It became a journalistic cliché for a time in the 1990s to say that the clash
between ‘Communism and capitalism’ had been replaced by that between
‘Islam and the West’. Certainly, two of the great uprisings of recent years had
taken place under the banner of Islam—the Iranian Revolution of 1979 and the
Afghan resistance to Russian occupation through the 1980s—and these had
inspired opposition movements in Egypt, Algeria, occupied Palestine and
elsewhere. But what the cliché ignored was that Islam, as so often before in its
history, could give expression to very different social interests which could
end in bloody conflict with each other.
The Iranian Revolution was an explosion of bitterness against a despotic
ruler, the Shah, and the US government which backed him. His rule had
antagonised traditionalist clerics, nationalist intellectuals, sections of
capitalism linked to the bazaars, the new working class of expanding industry,
the students, the impoverished petty bourgeoisie, the unemployed and semi-
employed of the urban slums, the national minorities and sections of the
peasantry. Islamic diatribes against ‘oppression’ could unite people from all
these groups against a common enemy. But once the Shah had been overthrown
in a classic uprising—with mass strikes, an armed insurrection and mutinies
within the army—each group read the Islamic texts in a different way and drew
very different practical conclusions. The first years after the rising not only
saw clashes between certain Islamic and secular groups, but bloody civil wars
between different Islamic factions. Eventually the faction around Ayatollah
Khomeini proved victorious and justified a reign of terror against its defeated
opponents in religious terms. This led many liberals to claim its barbarous
methods were uniquely ‘Islamic’, a product of a mentality supposedly lacking
the humanity of the ‘Judaeo-Christian tradition’. In fact Khomeini’s repression
was not qualitatively different from that endorsed by French Roman
Catholicism at the time of the crushing of the Commune, to that backed by
Prussian Lutheranism in 1919-20, or, for that matter, to that supported by US
Christian fundamentalists and Jewish rabbis as the Israeli army oversaw the
wholesale slaughter of Palestinians by Falangists in Lebanon in the early
1980s. The bloodbath was that of a counter-revolution, not the product of a
religion.
The Russian-sponsored regime in Afghanistan likewise provoked
resistance from disparate social groups as it attempted to impose a Stalinist
programme of rapid ‘modernisation’. When Russian troops occupied the
country, killing one pro-Russian ruler to replace him with another, Islam
seemed to again provide a rallying cry for resistance. But groups with
contradictory interests were to end up fighting each other as well as the
Russians. A civil war between Islamic groups followed the Russian
withdrawal until the Taliban, backed by Saudi Arabia and bitterly hostile to the
Islamic regime in neighbouring Iran, conquered most of the country.
Meanwhile, many of the Islamists from across the Middle East, who the
American CIA had arranged to go and fight in Afghanistan against the Russians,
now directed their fire against their pro-US local rulers—and were denounced
as ‘terrorists’ by the US.
Far from Islam being a single force opposed to the West, the biggest and
bloodiest war of the 1980s raged between the Islamic leaders of Iraq and the
‘Islamic Republic’ of Iran. It was a war in which both conservative Saudi
Arabia and the Islamist regime of Hassan al-Turabi in Sudan backed Iraq—as
did the US at decisive moments.
The growth of Islamic political movements was a product of the alienation
from the world order of tens of millions of people—especially the young and
educated, who had little hope of secure employment in societies trapped by
their position within the global system. The Koran’s vague injunctions against
oppression and proclamation of a just society offered a terminology that
seemed to provide an outlet for intense feelings of frustration. But the closer
the Islamists came to holding power the more their radical edge was blunted.
Islamic governments proved happy to work with Islamic capitalists, who in
turn continually made alliances with other parts of the world system, including
‘the great Satan’, the US. In every clash between national states in the Middle
East, Islamic governments were to be found on opposing sides.
The new imperialism
The old imperialism of direct colonial rule finally died in the last quarter of
the 20th century. Portugal’s ruling class was forced to abandon its colonies, the
white settler regime in Rhodesia gave way to Zimbabwe, the racist regime in
South Africa conceded majority rule, and Britain handed Hong Kong back to
China. Even what used to be called ‘semi-colonies’—weak governments
dependent on Western backing for survival—often achieved a certain
independence. The puppet became a client and the client sometimes turned on
its former master—as Saddam Hussein of Iraq showed when he marched into
Kuwait in 1990. But this did not mean the end of imperialism—the attempt of
major capitalist states to impose their will on lesser states.
In the mid-1990s many journalists, academics and politicians claimed that
states were unimportant in the ‘new global economy’. But it did not seem like
that to the heads of the multinational corporations or the governments which
worked with them. Studies showed that the owners and directors of such
corporations remained very much rooted in particular national states, using
them as bases from which to advance and protect their interests elsewhere. As
one study concluded:
The rivalry between states and the rivalry between firms for a secure place in
the world economy has become much fiercer, much more intense. As a result,
firms have become more involved with governments and governments have
come to recognise their increased dependence on the scarce resources
controlled by firms.307
The huge multinationals centred in the US depended on the US state to help
impose their policies on the rest of the world. The two major schemes for
dealing with Third World debt were, appropriately, named after members of
the US government—the Baker Plan and the Brady Plan.308 Behind the IMF and
World Bank talk of ‘new paradigms for development’ lay the reality of
ensuring the banks were paid off handsomely. Similarly, world trade
negotiations were about US attempts to impose its own ‘free trade’ hegemony
on other governments, equally eager to protect the sometime divergent interests
of their own capitalists.
But financial diplomatic pressures were not always enough to ensure the
ruling classes of the most powerful countries got their way. There were points
when governments felt military force alone could maintain their global
dominance.
The two Gulf wars were important examples of what could happen. Iraq
waged a long and bloody war against Iran throughout the 1980s, aiming both to
attract the support of the US and the wealthy Gulf states, and to cement its
relations with important multinationals. When it did not gain as much
financially as it had hoped from its backers in the war, it invaded one of them,
Kuwait, in 1990—miscalculating the response of the Great Powers, especially
the US. America, Britain and other states reacted with a massive military
build-up, a devastating bombing campaign, a land invasion and the massacre of
100,000 Iraqis as they streamed back along the road from Kuwait to Basra.
They followed this with a decade of economic sanctions which are estimated
by the United Nations to have killed 50,000 Iraqis a year.
The aim of the operation was not simply to discipline Iraq, or even to act
as a warning to other nationalist governments and movements in the Middle
East who might challenge the US oil companies. It was also intended to show
the world’s other powers that they had to accept the global goals of the US,
since only the US was powerful enough to be the world policeman.
Already in the 1980s, Republican administrations had set out to overcome
the hangover from defeat in Vietnam, the ‘Vietnam syndrome’, by
demonstrating the continued ability of the US to dominate the Western
hemisphere. This was the thinking behind its invasions of Grenada and of
Panama, and of its sponsorship of the right wing Contra guerillas who wreaked
havoc in Nicaragua. The Bush administration subsequently showed that the US
could carry out similar policing operations on a much bigger scale in the
Middle East. Under his Democrat successor, Bill Clinton, one military
operation followed another with increasing regularity through the 1990s—the
landing of marines in Somalia, the repeated bombing of Iraq, the bombing of
Serbian forces during the Bosnian civil war, the bombing of an alleged guerilla
camp in Afghanistan and of a pharmaceutical factory in Sudan, and the
launching of an all-out air war against Serbia.
It was not only the US which practised the new imperialism. Russia
attempted to maintain its overall dominance within wide sections of the former
USSR, using its military strength to influence the outcome of civil wars in
Georgia and Tajikistan. France maintained a major sphere of influence in
Africa, jostling with the US for dominance in regions such as Rwanda-
Burundi. Britain attempted to have an impact on events in Sierra Leone and
Nigeria, while Nigeria intervened in other west African states in turn under the
guise of ‘peacekeeping’. Greece and Turkey periodically threatened to go to
war as they clashed over their influence in the north east Mediterranean and
parts of the Balkans.
The world of the 1990s was a complex hierarchy of states and connected
business interests jostling for positions of influence. But they were not of equal
importance, and each knew that its position in the hierarchy depended, in the
end, on the armed force it could deploy. At the top, ever anxious to preserve its
position, was the United States. The last year of the decade saw exactly what
this entailed as the US-led NATO alliance set out systematically to degrade the
infrastructure of Serbia because its leader, Milosevic, had not gained
permission before emulating the viciousness of a score of US clients around
the world and attacking the country’s Albanian minority.
Conclusion
Conclusion
Illusion of the epoch
The 20th century began with a great fanfare about the inevitability of progress,
exemplified in Bernstein’s predictions of growing democratisation, growing
equality and growing all-round prosperity. The theme dominated again in the
mid-1950s and early 1960s in the writings of politicians like Anthony
Crosland, political theorists like Daniel Bell and economists like Paul
Samuelson. It re-emerged again in 1990, when Francis Fukuyama proclaimed
‘the end of history’, and persisted into the late 1990s, with Anthony Giddens’s
insistence that the categories of left and right belonged to the past. If everything
was not for the best in the best of all possible worlds, a few little changes and
it would be.
Yet the reality of life for vast sections of humanity was at various points in
the century as horrific as any known in history. The forward march of progress
gave rise to the bloodletting of the First World War; the mass impoverishment
of the early 1930s; the spread of Nazism and fascism over most of Europe; the
Stalinist gulag; the Japanese onslaught on Shanghai and Nanking; the
devastation of much of Europe between 1940s and 1945; the Bengal famine;
the obliteration of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; the 30 year war against Vietnam
and the nine year war against Algeria; the million dead in one Gulf War and the
200,000 dead in another; tens of thousands killed by death squads in El
Salvador, Guatemala and Argentina; and hundreds of thousands dead in the
bloody civil wars of Croatia, Bosnia, Tajikistan, Angola, Ethiopia, Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Afghanistan. Industrial progress all too often translated itself
into the mechanisation of war—or most horrifically, with the Holocaust, into
the mechanisation of mass murder. Nor was the picture any more hopeful at the
end of the century than halfway through. Whole countries outside Western
Europe and North America which had hoped at various points in the century to
‘catch up’ with the living standards of the ‘First World’ saw the dream fade
away—Argentina, Mexico, Venezuela, Brazil, Russia. The whole continent of
Africa found itself once again being written out of history as income per head
fell steadily over a 30 year period. Civil war continued to devastate Angola,
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Congo-Zaire. To the word
‘genocide’, born of the Nazism that arose in the 1930s, was added the phrase
‘ethnic cleansing’, coined in the civil wars of the 1990s.
Even in the advanced industrial countries the promises of endless wealth,
endless leisure and the withering away of class division that were so
fashionable in the 1890s, and again in the 1950s, proved to be a chimera.
Measured economic output continued to rise in most years for most economies,
but at only about half the rate during the long boom of the 1950s and early
1960s. And the rises did not translate into improvements in most people’s
quality of life.
In the US there was a more or less continual fall in real hourly wages
through the last quarter of the century. In Europe the statistics continued to
show rising real wages, but there is a great deal of evidence to suggest that the
increases were eaten up by rising indirect costs associated with the changing
pattern of work (longer journeys from home to work, rising transport costs,
increased reliance on fast food and frozen food, increased childcare costs),
with one ‘index of sustainable welfare’ suggesting that it rose more or less
continually from 1950 until the mid-1970s and then started to decline
thereafter.1 There has certainly been no qualitative improvement in people’s
lives, as was experienced in the 1950s and early 1960s. At the same time,
there has been increased pressure on those with jobs to work longer and
harder. The average American worked 164 hours longer in 1996 than they did
in 1976—the equivalent of one full month a year longer,2 with survey after
survey reporting people feeling under increasing stress at work. Recurrent
recessions and repeated ‘downsizing’ of workforces, even during periods of
‘recovery’, created levels of insecurity among people about their futures not
known since the 1930s. Mainstream political parties that had said insecurity
was a thing of the past in the 1970s insisted in the 1990s that there was nothing
they could do about it because it was part of the ‘new global economy’ (an
unacknowledged revamping of the old left wing phrase ‘international
capitalism’).
There was another side to the growing poverty of wide parts of the Third
and former Communist worlds and the growing insecurity in the West. It was
the growing concentration of wealth in the hands of the ruling classes. By the
late 1990s some 348 billionaires enjoyed a total wealth equal to the income of
half of humanity. In 1999 the United Nations Human Development Report could
tell that the world’s richest 200 people had doubled their wealth in four years.3
At the end of the 1960s, the gap between the richest and poorest fifths of the
world’s population stood at 30 to one, in 1990 at 60 to one, and in 1998 at 74
to one. Most of the very rich were concentrated in advanced counties. In 1980
the top managers of the 300 biggest US corporations had incomes 29 times
larger than the average manufacturing worker—by 1990 their incomes were 93
times greater. But the same phenomenon was visible elsewhere in the world,
where even in the poorest countries a thin ruling stratum expected to live the
lifestyles of the world’s very rich, and to keep multi-million dollar deposits in
Western banks as an insurance against social unrest at home. Everywhere their
reaction to social crisis was to accumulate wealth in order to insulate
themselves against its effects, not worrying overmuch if, in the process, the
basis fabric of society was undermined. The contracting out of state tax raising
to wealthy individuals (tax farming) had been a recurrent feature accompanying
the crises of pre-capitalist class societies, a feature which only served to
intensify the long term trend to crisis. The contracting out of state services
became a growing feature of capitalist class society in the last decade of the
20th century, with equally inevitable long term effects.
Along with the reborn insecurity and the recurrent slumps, another spirit
emerged from the nether world where it had been apparently banished after the
Second World War—various forms of fascism and Nazism. It became quite
normal, even during periods of ‘economic recovery’, for far right figures like
Le Pen in France and Haider in Austria to get 15 percent of the vote—and
quite realistic for them to hope to do much better with the onset of the next
great recession. It became equally normal for mainstream conservative
political parties to trade in the language of racism and ethnic division in order
to pick up votes, and for social democratic parties to concede to that language
in a desperate attempt to hold their own electorally.
Socialism, barbarism and the 21st century
Rosa Luxemburg, writing in the midst of world war in 1915, recalled a phrase
from Engels: ‘Capitalist society is faced with a choice, either an advance to
socialism or a reversion to barbarism.’ ‘We have read and repeated these
phrases repeatedly,’ she notes:
…without a conception of their terrible import…We stand before the awful
proposition: either the triumph of imperialism and the destruction of all
culture, and, as in ancient Rome, depopulation, desolation, degeneration, a cast
cemetery; or the victory of socialism, that is the conscious struggle of the
proletariat against imperialism…This is the dilemma of world history, its
inevitable choice whose scales are trembling the balance…Upon it depends
the future of humanity and culture.4
In this passage she was challenging in the most forceful way the illusion of
inevitable progress under capitalism. She was making the same point made by
Marx and Engels in The Communist Manifesto when they pointed out that the
historical alternative to the transformation of society by a newly emerged class
was the ‘common destruction of the contending classes’. This, as we have
seen, happened not only with the collapse of the Roman Empire in the west, but
also with the first ‘Dark Ages’, the early Bronze Age civilisations of Eurasia,
the collapse of the Teotihuacan and Mayan civilisations of Meso-America, and
the crisis of Abbasid Mesopotamia in the 11th century. It came close to
happening in second millennium BC Egypt, in 12th century AD China and in
14th century AD Europe. Rosa Luxemburg saw the world war as threatening a
re-enactment of such disasters: ‘In this war, imperialism has been victorious.
Its brutal sword of murder has dashed the scales, with overbearing brutality,
down into the abyss of shame and misery’.5
Leon Trotsky made the same point in 1921:
Humanity has not always risen along an ascending curve. No, there have
existed prolonged periods of stagnation and relapses into barbarism. Societies
raise themselves, attain a certain level, and cannot maintain it. Humanity
cannot sustain its position, its equilibrium is unstable; a society which cannot
advance falls back, and if there is not a class to lead it higher, it ends up by
breaking down, opening the way to barbarism.6
The founding document of Trotsky’s Fourth International, written on the
eve of renewed world war, posed the alternative grimly: ‘Without socialist
revolution, in the next historical period a catastrophe threatens the whole
culture of humanity’.7
Both Luxemburg and Trotsky located, as few other thinkers did, the insane
logic of capitalist society in the 20th century—the way in which forces of
production had turned into forces of destruction, and human creativity been
distorted into inhuman horror. The century was a century of barbarity on a
scale unknown, in Europe at least, since the 17th or even the 14th century. If the
century did not fulfil the worst prophesies of Luxemburg and Trotsky, in terms
of a complete collapse of culture and civilisation, there were also repeated
lurches towards barbarism in the strict sense of the word as used by Engels
and Luxemburg, of rulers prepared to pull society down around them rather
than concede their power—the behaviour of the White armies during the
Russian civil war, the drive to complete the Holocaust by the retreating Nazi
forces in the Second World War, and the willingness of both sides in the Cold
War to deploy nuclear devices which would have reduced the whole world to
a radioactive desert. In the last decade of the century whole areas of Africa,
the Caucasus and central Asia seemed caught in the same logic, with armies
led by rival warlords massacring each other and ravaging civilian populations
as they fought for scraps of wealth amid general economic and social decay.
That decade also exposed terrible new threats alongside the old ones of war
and economic slump.
The most dramatic is that of ecological catastrophe. Class societies have
always shown a tendency to place excessive demands on the environment
which sustains their populations. The history of pre-capitalist class societies
was a history, beyond a certain point, of famines and demographic collapse
produced by the sheer burden of maintaining greedy ruling classes and
expensive superstructures. The very economic dynamism that characterises
capitalism has vastly increased the speed at which negative ecological
consequences make themselves felt. Nineteenth century accounts of what
capitalism does to working class communities, from Dickens and Engels
onwards, are also accounts of polluted atmosphere, endemic diseases,
overcrowding and adulterated food in slum life. But at a time when a maximum
of ten million people worldwide were involved in industrial capitalist
production, ecological devastation was a localised problem—Manchester’s
smoke did not affect most of England, let alone the rest of the world. The
spread of capitalism to the whole world in the 20th century, encompassing six
billion or more people by the end of the century, transformed ecological
devastation into a global problem. The year 1998, one authoritative report
tells, was ‘the worst on record and caused more damage then ever before’,
forcing 25 million people to flee as refugees, ‘outnumbering those displaced
by war for the first time’.8 With one billion people living in unplanned shanty
towns, and 40 of the world’s 50 fastest growing cities located in earthquake
zones, the worst horrors are still to come. But that is not the end of it. The
production of ever-escalating amounts of carbon dioxide is causing the
‘greenhouse effect’ to heat up the globe, producing unpredictable weather
patterns that are expected to produce freak storms and rising ocean levels that
will flood huge coastal areas. The CFCs used in refrigerators are eating up the
ozone layer, causing a proliferation of skin cancers. The use of antibiotics in
animal feed is undermining the effectiveness of antibiotics in dealing with
human diseases. The unrestricted use of genetically modified crops could
create havoc for the whole of the food chain. Such ecological disasters, actual
and threatened, are no more natural disasters than were those which destroyed
the food supply of Mesopotamia in the 12th century, or which led to mass
starvation across Europe in the 14th century. They are a result of the specific
way in which human interaction with the environment is occurring on a world
scale.
Under capitalism, that interaction is organised through the competition of
rival capitals—of small scale firms in the early 19th century, and of giant
multinational and state-owned firms at the end of the 20th century. Competition
leads to an incessant search for new, more productive and more profitable
forms of interaction, without regard to their other consequences. States
sometimes try to regulate the whole process. But they are themselves drawn
into it by their desire to advance the interests of nationally based firms.
Regulation, they all too often say, is impossible because it will undermine the
competitiveness of locally-based firms to the advantage of foreign competitors.
And even when they do intervene it is after the damage is already done, for
there is no way state officials can second guess every industrial innovation and
foresee its wider impact.
So dangerous were the consequences by the end of the 20th century that
there was a tendency for people to turn their back on all science and all
technology. Yet without the technologies of the last century, there would be no
way to feed the world’s population, let alone free them from the ravages of
hunger and overwork that have been most people’s lot since the rise of class
society. There was a parallel tendency for people to adopt one argument of that
old reactionary Malthus, and to insist there were simply too many people—or,
at least, that there would be by the time the world’s population had doubled in
30 or 40 years. Yet the eightfold growth in humanity’s numbers since Malthus’s
time was matched by a more than eightfold increase in its food supply. If
people went hungry in parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America, it was a result
not of an absolute shortage of food, but of its distribution along class lines.
The problem for humanity is not technology or human numbers as such, but
how existing society determines people’s use of the technology. Crudely, the
world can easily sustain twice its present population. It cannot, however,
sustain ever greater numbers of internal combustion engines, each pumping out
kilograms of carbon dioxide a day in the interests of the profitability
requirements of giant oil and motor firms. Once humanity covers the globe in
such numbers the precondition of its continuing survival is the planned
employment of technology to meet real human needs, rather than its
subordination to the blind accumulation of competing capitals.
The use of technology for competitive accumulation also finds expression
in its use for wars. In the 1990s the military technology which gave us the
carnage of the Western Front in the First World War, and the barbarity of the
Eastern Front and of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in the Second World War, looked
incredibly primitive.
On the one hand, there was the development of mega-billion dollar
military hardware systems. The US, by spending even more in absolute terms
(although not as a proportion of national output) than at the height of the Cold
War in the early 1950s, and by utilising half a century of advances in computer
technology, was able to wage wars against Iraq and Serbia which cost it not a
single soldier, while killing thousands, or even hundreds of thousands, of the
other side. It also began to embark down the path of waging its wars by remote
control from its own continent, and looking once more to the deployment of
‘Star Wars’ anti-ballistic missile (ABM) systems to protect itself against any
retaliation.
On the other hand, there was the resort to deadly destructive microsystems.
Small states like Israel and impoverished ones like Pakistan found themselves
with enough engineering graduates and enough access to modern computing
technology to manufacture their own nuclear weapons—pygmy weapons by US
standards, but sufficient if the occasion arises to fry alive hundreds of
thousands of people in the capital cities of neighbouring countries. For some,
at least, the lesson of the US’s deployment of firepower in the Gulf and the
Balkans was drawn by the Russian ex-premier Viktor Chernomyrdin: ‘Even the
smallest independent states will seek nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles
to defend themselves’.9 For those without the ability to develop those
technologies, there were the cruder and cheaper technologies of chemical and
biological warfare developed by the Great Powers through the first three
quarters of the century.
In the second half of the 20th century the apologists for Great Power
nuclear programmes argued they would ensure peace through the logic of MAD
—Mutually Assured Destruction. Neither power, they said, would use its
nuclear weapons first because of the certainty of retaliatory destruction if it did
so. The Cuban crisis of 1963 showed how close this logic could come to
breaking down, and in the 1980s the US threatened to undermine it completely
by establishing a ‘first strike capacity’, with the deployment of cruise missiles
in Europe and its first abortive attempt to build an ABM system. If the threat
was not realised it was because the escalating military costs broke the back of
the Soviet economy just as the US found that it did not yet have the technology
for a functioning ABM system—and mass protests increased the political costs
of European governments keeping cruise missiles on their soil. But the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and the renewed building of ABM systems
brought the threat back with a vengeance. The world’s greatest power and
many of its smaller ones were once again attracted by the logic of ‘first
strike’—responding to a sudden escalation of international tension by using
nuclear weapons in the expectation of avoiding retaliation. This in turn
increased the likelihood of pre-emptive military strikes, both conventional and
nuclear, in a desperate attempt to keep rival powers and lesser powers under
control. The barbarism that did not quite materialise in the latter half of the
20th century becomes a real possibility in the 21st. Any perspective on the
future which looks at it in terms of several decades rather than just a couple of
years must rate the chances of nuclear conflict on some scale as likely, and
with it the throwing of whole parts of the world into barbarism proper.
These chances are increased by growing economic instability. A slump on
the scale of the 1930s would wreak political havoc in country after country,
creating conditions, as in the inter-war years, in which parties could easily rise
to power which resorted to military adventures as a way of dealing with
domestic problems. The omens are already there with the rise of the far right
vote in important countries. Again, once the perspective is one of decades, the
possibility of such parties getting access to nuclear weapons becomes a
likelihood, unless a class alternative emerges to the present system which sets
out to reorganise the whole of society on a different basis. The alternatives of
socialism or barbarism are posed more starkly than ever.
A universal class?
The 20th century was not just a century of horrors. It was also, as we have
seen, a century of great upsurges of struggle from below, of working class led
rebellions against the forces responsible for the horrors: the syndicalist strikes
prior to the First World War; the Russian Revolution and the revolts across
Europe and the colonial world after that war; the waves of insurgency in
Austria, France and Spain in 1934-36, and in France, Italy and Greece in
1943-45; the Hungarian Revolution of 1956; the events of 1968 and after; and
the great Polish strikes and occupations of 1980. Only one of those great
revolts turned into successful revolution, that in Russia, and that was soon
isolated until the life was strangled from it. But the struggles were one of the
great determining factors in the history of the century. And, here again, the
close of the century did not see an end to the struggles. Deflected class struggle
lay behind the collapse of the Eastern bloc. In Western Europe the 1990s saw a
collapse of the right wing Berlusconi government in Italy after a wave of
strikes; the sudden revival of working class struggle in France with a month of
public strikes and demonstrations in November-December 1995 leading to the
eventual collapse of the right wing Juppé government; a wave of strikes and
protests in Germany; a general strike in Denmark; successive strike waves in
South Korea; general strikes in Colombia and Ecuador; and the fall of the 32
year-old dictatorship of General Suharto in Indonesia after massive
spontaneous demonstrations and riots.
These great social and political upheavals did not prevent superficial and
fashionable commentators speaking of an end of class politics. Even Eric
Hobsbawm, long regarded as one of Britain’s best-known Marxists, could
claim that, while Marx was right when he wrote of the instability of capitalism,
he was wrong to see the working class as driven into historic opposition to the
system. The proponents of such arguments relied on two sets of evidence—the
decline in the proportion of the populations of advanced industrial countries
involved in manufacturing, and the relatively small number of people looking
to the revolutionary overthrow of capitalist society in these countries. Neither
sort of evidence justified their conclusions.
Certainly, the old bastions of the working class—the miners, the steel
workers and the shipyard workers—were much reduced in numbers in
countries like Britain, where even the number of car workers at the end of the
1990s was only a half or a third of what it was 30 years previously. But other
changes more than compensated for this. In the advanced countries their places
were taken by growing numbers of jobs in white collar employment and the
‘service’ sector, and many jobs which used to be thought of as ‘middle class’
increasingly resembled those in old-style manufacturing industry. Everywhere
‘line managers’ played the same role as the traditional foremen; everywhere
the pressure was on people to work harder and show ‘commitment’ by doing
unpaid overtime. Assessment procedures became near-universal, with attempts
to introduce payment by results even in areas like schoolteaching.
Far from the assembly line disappearing with the relative decline of
manufacturing, it spread into new areas. Indeed, in many sectors the distinction
between ‘services’ and ‘manufacturing’ no longer made much sense: someone
who worked a machine making a computer was categorised as
‘manufacturing’, while someone who performed routine operations in
processing its software was categorised as ‘services’ someone who put
hamburgers in a can was ‘manufacturing’, someone who put them in a fast food
bun, ‘services’. Both sorts of work produced commodities that were sold for a
profit, and both were shaped by the continual pressure to create the largest
possible profits.
The picture on a world scale was even clearer. The second half of the 20th
century witnessed an enormous spread of wage labour internationally. Textile
plants, steel works, oil refineries and car assembly plants were set up in
virtually every major country in every continent. Along with them went docks,
airports, trucking and rail terminals, modern banking systems, and skyscraper
offices. Cities expanded massively as a result. In 1945 there were arguments
over whether London or New York was the world’s biggest city. By the end of
the century the argument was between Mexico City, Bombay and Tokyo. The
new industries and cities meant new working classes. By the 1980s, South
Korea alone contained more industrial workers than the whole world had
when Marx and Engels wrote The Communist Manifesto—and it contained
millions of non-industrial wage earners as well.
Of course, the world’s workforce was not made up only of wageworkers.
There remained many hundreds of millions of peasants owning small plots of
land in Asia, Africa, parts of Latin America and even parts of Eastern Europe.
The cities of the Third World contained massive impoverished petty
bourgeoisies whose survival depended on the selling of whatever goods and
services, however meagre, they could find a market for, and who merged into
the even vaster mass of casual labour to be found in the sprawling slums
around the cities. The psychology of these groups could be very different from
that of the industrial workers. Yet like them, and unlike the middle classes and
peasantry of a century ago, their lives were completely tied to the market and
dependent on the logic of capital.
Karl Marx once made the distinction between a ‘class in itself’ that has a
certain objective position within a society, and a ‘class for itself’ that fights
consciously for goals of its own. The working class existed as never before as
a class in itself at the end of the 20th century, with a core of perhaps two
billion people, around which there were another two billion or so people
whose lives were subject in important ways to the same logic as the core. The
real argument about the role of the working class is about if and how it can
become a class for itself.
The whole point about Marx’s distinction is that no class that has arisen
historically has been able to start off as a class for itself. It grows up within an
old order of society, and its members have no experience of any other. They
necessarily begin by taking the values of that society for granted. The
prejudices of the old society are also, initially at least, the prejudices of the
members of the new class. This changes only when they are forced, often by
circumstances beyond their own control, to fight for their interests within the
old society. Such struggles lead to ties growing up between them, creating
loyalties and values different to those of the society. On the terrain created by
this, new notions take root about how society can be run, which in turn form
part of the framework for subsequent generations’ understanding of the world.
The change in ideas does not occur according to a simple upward linear
movement. Just as the struggle of the new class is characterised by small
successes and partial defeats, by dramatic advances and sudden, sometimes
devastating, setbacks, so there are ebbs and flows in the spread of the
transformation of people’s ideas. The history of the rise of the capitalist class
provides example after example of such ebbs and flows. At each stage, groups
begin to define themselves in ways different to those of the old feudal order,
but then try to conciliate with it, making their peace with the pre-capitalist
ruling classes, accepting their values and helping to perpetuate their society,
leaving it to subsequent generations to have to start afresh the fight for a
different sort of society. There must have been many people who felt, during
the wars in northern Italy at the end of the 15th century, during the religious
wars in France a century later, or during the horrors of the Thirty Years War in
Bohemia and Germany, that the bourgeoisie would never be able to transform
the whole of society in its own image. Yet, by the 19th century, economic
development had given it such a weight as a class that even the setbacks of
1848 could not halt a seemingly inexorable advance to power.
There is nothing magical about workers under capitalism which enables
them to follow some royal road to class consciousness. The society around
them is permeated by capitalist values, and they take these values for granted.
Even their exploitation is organised through a labour market, where they
compete with each other for jobs. As well as the pressure which again and
again causes them to combine together against the subordination of their lives
to the inhuman logic of capital accumulation, there are also the factors which
can all too easily break apart that unity—unemployment, which makes each
individual despair of any way of making a livelihood except at the expense of
others, or defeats for their organisations which break their sense of solidarity
and make them feel that no amount of unity and struggle will ever change things
for the better. The growth of new values that are thrown up in periods of
successful struggle—embodied in notions of solidarity across national, ethnic
and gender divisions—can suddenly be disrupted, distorted or even destroyed.
They can also come under considerable pressure during periods of capitalist
‘prosperity’, when sections of workers find they gain from identification with
the system: this happens to those who experience upward mobility to become
foremen, supervisors or managers; to those who manage to carve out a niche
for themselves as small business people; and to those who become, as trade
union officials and Labour or social democratic politicians, the professional
mediators of capitalist democracy. Such people can be the most outspoken and
dynamic personalities in their localities or workplaces, and their adaptation to
the system has the effect of blunting the consciousness of class among other
workers.
Finally, the process of transformation from the class in itself to the class
for itself is continually interrupted by the restructuring and enlargement of the
working class as capitalism itself develops. New groups of workers emerge
and have to undergo a learning process afresh at each stage of the system. In
Britain, for instance, the core of the working class in the 1840s at the time of
Chartism was made up of textile workers; in the years before the First World
War it consisted of workers in heavy industry like shipyard workers, miners
and steel workers; in the early years after the Second World War it was made
up of engineering workers. Each had to go through the process again of
developing notions already embodied, to some degree, in the consciousness of
preceding groups. The differences between old and new workers can be even
more pronounced when there is massive and rapid industrialisation, as
happened through much of the 20th century in many countries: the working
class which made the revolution of 1917 in Russia was drowned in a vast sea
of new workers by the late 1930s; the Italian workers who shook the Mussolini
regime in 1943 were diluted by very much larger numbers of workers fresh
from the countryside by the 1960s; very few of the tens of millions of China’s
workers in the late 1980s were direct descendants of those who waged the
great strikes of the 1920s. Yet in each case, after a longer or shorter time lag,
new traditions emerged with similarities to the old: the Italian strikes of 1969
and after; the Chinese workers’ support for the Tiananmen Square protests of
1989; the Russian miners’ strikes of 1989 and 1991. In none of these cases did
workers show full revolutionary consciousness. But they did, in each case,
begin to break with the values and assumptions of the old society. They began
to move towards becoming a class for itself, even if they did not complete the
journey.
What we witnessed in the last quarter of the 20th century was not the
extinction of the working class or of the development of its consciousness as a
class. Instead, we saw the fruits of its massive expansion—an expansion which
simultaneously gave it more power to shape society than ever before, but
which also forced large sections to have to learn anew what smaller sections
had already known three quarters of a century before. The learning process
involved precisely the deflection of the struggle that characterised these years.
It left behind a mass of confused and contradictory notions in the minds of tens
of millions of people. This was far from the class in itself fully becoming a
class for itself. But it was also very far indeed from the disappearance of
workers’ struggles as an active shaping force in history.
Writing at the beginning of the century the future leader of the Russian
Revolution, Lenin, commented that, far from the economic struggle of workers
automatically leading to revolutionary consciousness, ‘the spontaneous
development of the working class movement leads to its subordination to
bourgeois ideology’. This was because ‘that bourgeois ideology is far older in
origin than socialist ideology, is far more fully developed and…has at its
disposal immeasurably more means of dissemination’.10 His famous
conclusion was, ‘Class political consciousness can be brought to the workers
only from without’.11 It was a conclusion criticised by Rosa Luxemburg, among
others, and Lenin himself admitted later that he had underrated the role of
workers in developing socialist ideas.12 But he rightly focused on a point taken
up and developed a quarter of a century later by the often misunderstood Italian
revolutionary Antonio Gramsci.
Gramsci pointed out that the members of a class are usually exposed to
conflicting views of the world—those that arise out of the everyday practice of
existing society and those that arise in so far as the class (or a section of it) has
experience of fighting to transform that society. As a result, anyone’s
personality ‘is made up in a queer way. It contains elements of the caveman
and principles of the most modern advanced learning, shabby prejudices of all
past historical phases and intuitions of a future philosophy of the human race
united all over the world’.13 These contradictory elements are combined in
different ways among different individuals and groups. Some are trapped
almost completely within the views characteristic of existing society, and some
have gone a very long way into breaking from these, but most are stuck
somewhere in the middle, pulled first one way then another under the impact of
those with more homogenous views at either extreme. The concrete action of a
class at any point in history depends on which of the ‘extremes’ is most
successful in attracting the middle group as social upheavals (wars, economic
crises, strikes and civil wars) open it up to new ideas. The degree to which a
class in itself becomes a class for itself depends not only on material changes
in the world around it, but also on the formation of rival parties within it.
This was also shown in the rise of capitalism. The ‘great transition’ was
not just a result of objective economic factors. It also depended upon
successive attempts by sections of the new burgher or bourgeois classes to
organise themselves around views of the world very different to those of the
old order—and of other sections to work with representatives of the old order
to subvert such organisation. It is the history of movements of revolt or reform
in the 8th century Islamic Empire and the 11th century Chinese Empire, and of
the suppression of those movements; of the movements of the Renaissance and
Reformation, and of the succumbing in Italy, Germany and France of those
movements to the old order; of the victories of the Dutch and English
revolutions, and of the horrific impasse of the Thirty Years War; of the
Enlightenment, and of the obscurantist reaction against the Enlightenment; of
the struggle of the French Assembly against its king, and of the Jacobins against
the Girondins. The transition was not achieved in one great leap, and nor was
it a result of slow, piecemeal change. It depended on the formation, defeat and
reformation of parties built around a new developing worldview over several
hundred years.
The conquest of the world by capitalism has speeded up the historical
process enormously. There was more change to the lives of the great majority
of the world’s population in the 20th century than in the whole preceding 5,000
years. Such sheer speed of change meant that again and again people were
trying to cope with new situations using ideas that reflected recent experience
of very different ones. They had decades to undergo a transformation in their
ideas comparable to that which took the bourgeoisie in Europe 600 years. The
fact that at the end of the century the process was not complete cannot be
interpreted as proving it was not still underway. The history of the 20th century
was the history of successive generations of people, ever larger in number,
resisting the logic of subjection to the world of competitive capital
accumulation. Once, in Russia, they were briefly successful. Sometimes—as in
Germany in 1918-19, in France in 1936 or in Poland in 1980s—they settled for
half-success, only then to be defeated. Sometimes they were defeated terribly,
as in Germany in January 1933, without even joining the battle. But none of this
provides the slightest excuse for claiming the class struggle is over. The sort of
struggles carried out by a small working class in the 19th century, a bigger one
in the first half of the 20th century, and a much larger one in the last quarter of
the century will be repeated by sections of the billions-strong working class of
the new millennium.
Out of these struggles will emerge new attempts to remould society around
the values of solidarity, mutual support, egalitarianism, collective cooperation
and a democratically planned use of resources. The ruling classes of the
world, like their predecessors for 5,000 years, will do their utmost to thwart
these attempts and will, if necessary, unleash endless barbarities so as to hang
on to what they regard as their sacred right to power and property. They will
defend the existing capitalist order to the end—even if it is the end of
organised human life.
There is no way to tell in advance what the outcome of such great conflicts
will be. That depends not only on the clash of objective class forces—of the
growth of classes in themselves—but also on the extent to which there emerges
within the expanded ‘universal’ working class a core of people who
understand how to fight and know how to win their fellows to this
understanding. There will be no shortage of groups and movements in bitter
opposition to one or other aspect of the system. Its very barbarity and
irrationality will ensure this in the future, as in the past. But the history of the
20th century shows that these elements can only be truly effective when they
crystallise into revolutionary organisations dedicated to challenging the system
in all its aspects. The bourgeoisie needed such a crystallisation with the New
Model Army in the 17th century and the Jacobin Club in the 18th century. The
Russian working class needed it with the Bolshevik Party in 1917. The
massively expanded world working class is going to need it again and again in
the 21st century if humanity as a whole is not going to face destruction. The
need can only be met if there are people who apply themselves to the task. The
Irish revolutionary socialist James Connolly once pointed out, ‘The only true
prophets are those who carve out the future’.
Understanding the past helps. That is why I wrote this book.
Notes
Part one: The rise of class societies
1 In fact, such arguments certainly cannot be drawn from the genuinely
scientific study of genetics. See, for example, S Rose, Lifelines (London,
1997); R Hubbard, The Politics of Women’s Biology (New Jersey, 1990); R
Lewontin, The Doctrine of DNA (London, 1993).
2 D Morris, The Naked Ape (London, 1967).
3 R Ardrey, African Genesis (London, 1969).
4 R Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (Oxford, 1976).
5 R Lee, ‘Reflections on Primitive Communism’, in T Ingold, D Riches and J
Woodburn (eds), Hunters and Gatherers, vol 1 (Oxford, 1988).
6 The ability to use language is, according to the generally accepted theory of
Noam Chomsky, a genetically determined feature of all modern humans. The
connection between language, abstraction and human consciousness is spelt
out in the books written by the Russian Marxist Voloshinov during the
1920s, and in part two, Labour, of the Ontology by the Hungarian Marxist
Georg Lukács.
7 I am here giving a very brief precis of very long debates. For fuller details
and references, see the earlier parts of my article, ‘Engels and the Origins of
Human Society’, in International Socialism 65 (Winter 1994).
8 There has been a century-long scientific debate on the exact relation between
the Neanderthals and modern humans—over, for instance, whether they
could have interbred. I cannot go into the debate here. Suffice to say, the
displacement of the Neanderthals did not necessitate their butchery by
modern humans, as some ‘born in blood’ accounts of our origins, like those
of Ardrey, would have us believe. See my article, ‘Engels and the Origins
of Human Society’, for an amplification of this point.
9 ‘Hunting and gathering’ is a somewhat misleading term, since gathering of
vegetable food usually played a bigger part in providing people with a diet
than hunting animals.
10 Hence the old use of the word ‘savagery’ used to describe such societies—
a term used even by those like Lewis Morgan, Frederick Engels and C
Gordon Childe who attempted to provide a scientific account of their
development.
11 The phrase is from the 17th century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes,
but it sums up the ‘common sense’ attitude which pervaded most accounts of
these societies until the 1960s and which is still to be found in popular
books like R Ardrey, African Genesis.
12 M Sahlins, Stone Age Economics (London, 1974).
13 C Turnbull, The Forest People (New York, 1962), pp107, 110, 124-125.
14 E Friedl, Women and Men: the Anthropologist’s View (New York, 1975),
p28.
15 E Leacock, Myths of Male Dominance (New York, 1981), pp139-140.
16 R Lee, The !Kung San (Cambridge, 1979), p118.
17 The ! at the beginning of !Kung denotes a ‘click’ sound which does not exist
in Indo-European languages.
18 R Lee, The !Kung San, p244.
19 Le P P LeJeune (1635), quoted in M Sahlins, Stone Age Economics, p14.
20 E Friedl, Women and Men: The Anthropologist’s View (New York, 1975),
pp15, 28.
21 All the quotes are from R Ardrey, African Genesis, pp300, 399.
22 R Lee, Reflections on Primitive Communism.
23 Quoted in E Gellner, Plough, Sword and Book (London, 1991).
24 Engels was right in insisting that there was no systematic domination of
women in these societies. However, he was wrong in one important detail
—he vastly overestimated the role played by lineages in most hunting-
gathering societies. For the full argument on this, see my ‘Engels and the
Origins of Human Society’.
25 Palestine, Syria, Lebanon, southern Turkey and Iraq.
26 For full accounts of what happened along the lines presented here, see D O
Henry, From Foraging to Agriculture (Philadelphia, 1989); J V S Megaw
(ed), Hunters, Gatherers and the First Farmers Beyond Europe (Leicester,
1977); the essays by P M Dolukhanov and G W W Barker in C Renfrew
(ed), Explaining Cultural Change (London, 1973); C K Maisels, The
Emergence of Civilisation (London, 1993), chs 3 and 4.
27 J Harlan, ‘A Wild Wheat Harvest in Turkey’, Archaeology 20 (1967),
pp197-201, quoted in C K Maisels, The Emergence of Civilisation, pp68-
69.
28 Gordon Childe’s term.
29 Various estimates and calculations in C K Maisels, The Emergence of
Civilisation, p125.
30 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society (London, 1966), p96.
31 Although others have argued that the statuettes are connected to fertility
rites, and no more imply a high status for women than does the Catholic cult
of the Virgin Mary.
32 A point strongly stressed by the Western anthropologists who carried out
pioneering studies of them in the 1920s and 1930s. See, for instance, R
Benedicts, Patterns of Culture (London, 1935).
33 J-F Lafitan, quoted in R Lee, Reflections on Primitive Communism, p252.
34 E Evans-Pritchard, quoted in R Lee, Reflections on Primitive Communism,
p252.
35 This is one of the key arguments in M Sahlins, Stone Age Economics.
36 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society, p96.
37 See J V S Megaw (ed), Hunters, Gatherers and the First Farmers Beyond
Europe, and the essays by P M Dolukhanov, G W W Barker, C M Nelson, D
R Harris and M Tosi in C Renfrew (ed), Explaining Cultural Change.
38 F Katz, Ancient American Civilisations (London, 1989); W M Bray, F H
Swanson and I S Farrington, The Ancient Americas (Oxford, 1989), p14.
39 As the biologist Jared Diamond has pointed out, no one has yet succeeded
in domesticating animals or plants in these regions properly. See J
Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel (London, 1997), pp163-175.
40 This point is made very well in J Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel, p139.
41 R Lee, Reflections on Primitive Communism, p262.
42 C Levi-Strauss, quoted in M Sahlins, Stone Age Economics, p132.
43 H I Hogbin, quoted in M Sahlins, Stone Age Economics, p135.
44 Before him the pioneer 19th century anthropologist Morgan wrote of a
transition from ‘barbarism’ (meaning a purely agricultural way of life) to
‘civilisation’ (one centred around cities). The terms were used by Frederick
Engels, but have fallen out of use as it has become increasingly clear that
‘civilised’ societies in Morgan’s sense can be much more barbaric than
early agricultural ones.
45 See the example given by M Sahlins, Stone Age Economics.
46 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History (Harmondsworth, 1948),
pp59-62.
47 See, for example, F Katz, Ancient American Civilisations, pp78-79, 81,
102, 113, 128.
48 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History, pp80-81.
49 C K Maisels, The Emergence of Civilisation: From Hunting and
Gathering to Agriculture, Cities and the State in the Near East (London,
1993), p297.
50 C K Maisels, The Emergence of Civilisation, p297.
51 According to F Katz, Ancient American Civilisations, p29.
52 V Gordon Childe, Social Evolution (London, 1963), pp155-156.
53 For a discussion on these pre-urban stone constructions, see C Renfrew,
Before Civilisation (Harmondsworth, 1976).
54 Thus it is certain that developments in the Aegean were encouraged by what
had happened on the Asian mainland to the south east and the African
mainland to the south. It is likely that some of the developments in Egypt
(the sorts of grains which were sown, some of the artefacts) were
influenced, to a limited degree, by contacts with the earlier developing
Mesopotamian civilisation, and it is just possible that the Latin American
civilisations had had some contact with those of east and south east Asia.
55 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society, pp95-96.
56 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society, p98.
57 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society, p103.
58 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society, p104.
59 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History, p88.
60 T B Jones, quoted in C K Maisels, The Emergence of Civilisation, p184.
61 C J Gadd, ‘Cities in Babylon’, in I E S Edwards, C J Gadd and N G L
Hammond (eds), Cambridge Ancient History, vol 1, part 2 (Cambridge,
1971).
62 F Katz, Ancient American Civilisations, p38.
63 G R Willey and D B Shimkin, ‘The Maya Collapse: A Summary View’, in T
P Culbert (ed), The Classic Maya Collapse (Albuquerque, 1973), p459.
64 As Michael Mann puts it in his own sociological jargon, they were not
willing ‘to increase their collective powers because of the distributive
powers involved’, M Mann, The Sources of Social Power, vol 1
(Cambridge, 1986), p39.
65 For one account of such changes, see D R Harris, ‘The Prehistory of
Tropical Agriculture’, in C Renfrew (ed), Explaining Cultural Change,
pp398-399.
66 M Sahlins, Stone Age Economics, p140.
67 See Christine Ward Gailey’s account of the attempts between AD 1100 and
1400 by the highest ranking chiefly groups in Tonga to cut themselves off
from their obligations to lower ranking people to attempt to form themselves
into a ruling class, in C W Gailey, Kinship to Kingship (Texas, 1987)
68 V Gordon Childe, Man Makes Himself (London, 1956), p155.
69 See, for example, R Tharper, Ancient Indian Social History (Hyderabad,
1984).
70 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society (London, 1966), p114.
71 See the account of the Incas in A J Pla, Modo de Produccion Asiatico y las
Formaciones Econimico Sociales Inca y Azteca (Mexico, 1982), p151.
72 R M Adams, The Evolution of Urban Society, p90.
73 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History, p72.
74 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History, p72.
75 This is the argument in K Sachs, Sisters and Wives (London, 1979), pp117,
121.
76 For a much fuller development of my argument on the way women’s
oppression arose, see my ‘Engels and the Origins of Human Society’,
pp129-142.
77 I M Diakhanov, ‘The Structure of Near Eastern Society Before the Middle
of the 2nd Millennium BC’, Oikumene 3:1 (Budapest, 1982).
78 Both on the outskirts of modern Cairo
79 B J Kemp, ‘Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate
Period’, in B G Trigger, B J Kemp, D O’Connor and A B Lloyd, Ancient
Egypt: A Social History (Cambridge, 1983), p176.
80 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History, p117.
81 V Gordon Childe, Man Makes Himself, p227.
82 V Gordon Childe, The Pre-History of European Society (London, 1958),
p7. The central theme of this work is that the ‘barbarians’ were more
innovative because they were less held back by an all-powerful despotic
state structure. But Childe tends to see the innovative ‘barbarians’ as almost
always European, and fails to take into account the way in which those
outside the established empires in other continents—in Asia, Africa and the
Americas—also made enormous advances (for instance, the whole series of
innovations in central Asia in the first millennium AD which were, as we
will see later, then adopted in China before spreading to Europe, or the
independent development of iron technology in parts of Africa).
83 B G Trigger, ‘The Rise of Egyptian Civilisation’, in B G Trigger and others,
Ancient Egypt, p67.
84 V Gordon Childe, Man Makes Himself, pp230-231.
85 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History, pp119-120.
86 G R Willey and D B Shimkin, ‘The Maya Collapse’, in T P Culbert (ed),
The Classic Maya Collapse.
87 Quoted in M Rich, Egypt’s Making (London, 1991), p226. For a criticism
of the view that this text refers to real events, see B J Kemp, in B G Trigger
and others (eds), Ancient Egypt, pp74-75, 115.
88 See, for example, F Katz, Ancient American Civilisations, pp78-79 and
introduction to T P Culbert (ed), The Classic Maya Collapse, p19.
89 See, for example, F Katz, Ancient American Civilisations, p78.
90 B J Kemp, in B G Trigger and others (eds), Ancient Egypt, p115.
91 B S Lesko, ‘Rank, Roles and Rights’, in L H Lesko (ed), Pharoah’s
Workers (Ithaca, 1994), p15.
92 B S Lesko, ‘Rank, Roles and Rights’, p39.
93 B S Lesko, ‘Rank, Roles and Rights’, p38.
94 K Marx, Preface to the Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy,
in K Marx and F Engels, Selected Works, vol 1 (London, 1962), pp362-363.
95 K Marx and F Engels, The Communist Manifesto (London, 1996), p3.
96 V Gordon Childe, What Happened in History, p137.
97 K W Butzer, Early Hydraulic Civilisation in Egypt (Chicago, 1976), p46.
Part two: The ancient world
1 Some historians assume that knowledge of iron making must have been been
transmitted into Africa. See, for instance, R Mauny, ‘Trans-Saharan
Contacts in the Iron Age’, in J D Gage (ed), Cambridge History of Africa,
vol 2, p318. But Jared Diamond argues that the techniques used in sub-
Saharan Africa were rather different to those elsewhere, pointing to
independent discovery. See J Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel, (London,
1977), p394.
2 Centred on what is now Bihar.
3 Quoted in D D Kosambi, An Introduction to the Study of Indian History
(Bombay, 1996), p190.
4 R Thapar, History of India, vol 1 (Harmondsworth), p84.
5 R S Sharma, Light on Early Indian Society and Economy (Bombay, 1966),
p66.
6 R Thapar, ‘Asoka India and the Gupta Age’, in A L Basham, A Cultural
History of India (Oxford, 1975), p44.
7 R S Sharma, Light, p78. Romila Thapar is critical of D D Kosambi for
seeing the later Maurya period as one of economic decline: ‘If anything the
picture is one of an expanding economy’, R Thapar, Asoka and the Decline
of the Mauryas (Oxford, 1961), pp204-205.
8 H J J Winer, ‘Science’, in A L Basham, A Cultural History, p154.
9 H J J Winer, ‘Science’, p154.
10 R Thapar, ‘Asoka’, p49.
11 It did not build the wall from scratch, as is sometimes said, but connected
up a number of pre-existing walls. The present Great Wall was restored and
extended by the Ming Dynasty in the 17th century AD.
12 According to texts paraphrased in H Maspero, China in Antiquity (first
published in French in the 1920s) (Folkestone, 1978), p26.
13 See, for instance, D Bodde, ‘The State and Empire of Ch’in’, in D Twitchett
and M Loewe (eds), Cambridge History of China, vol 1 (Cambridge,
1986), p21.
14 H Maspero, China, p45. For some discussions of modern Chinese scholars
on the question of the character of ancient Chinese society, see the
contributions by Wu Daken, Ke Changyi and Zhao Lusheng, in T Brook (ed),
The Asiatic Mode of Production in China (New York, 1989).
15 H Maspero, China, p70.
16 Cho-yun Hsu, Han Agriculture (Washington, 1980), p4. See also J Gernet,
A History of Chinese Civilisation (Cambridge, 1982), pp67-69, and D
Bodde, ‘The State’, pp22-23.
17 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p6.
18 J Gernet, History, p72.
19 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p12.
20 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p13.
21 Shih-chi, quoted in D Bodde, ‘The State’, p40.
22 Details given in D Bodde, ‘The State’, p45.
23 J Gernet, History, p109, and D Bodde, ‘The State’, p52.
24 According to J Gernet, History, p109.
25 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p3.
26 K Wittfogel, ‘The Fundamental Stages of Chinese Economic History’, in
Zeitschrift für Sozial Forschung, no 4 (1935).
27 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p39.
28 ‘Discourses on Iron and Salt’ (81 BC), extracts translated in Cho-yun Hsu,
Han, p191.
29 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p53.
30 Translated in Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p165.
31 Edict contained in D Bodde, ‘The State’, p69.
32 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, pp6-7.
33 D Bodde, ‘The State’, pp71-72.
34 D Bodde, ‘The State’, pp71-72.
35 Quoted in D Bodde, ‘The State’, p83.
36 Cho-yun Hsu, Han, p153.
37 For a general survey of conditions, see R Osborne, Greece in the Making
(London, 1996), pp17-37.
38 G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World (London,
1983), p293.
39 R Osborne, Greece, p67, explains the growth of slavery very much in these
terms, although he does not use the term ‘surplus’. De Ste Croix argues that
under Greek conditions slavery was much more ‘profitable’ to the ruling
class than serf, let alone free, labour could ever be. See G E M De Ste
Croix, Class Struggle, p226-231. By contrast, Ellen Meiksins Wood does
not even discuss the material circumstances of cultivation, and therefore the
circumstances in which slavery took root, in E M Wood, Peasant, Citizen
and Slave (London, 1988). This is typical of the lack of materialism which
is the defining feature of the ‘political Marxism’ of herself, Robert Brenner
and others.
40 G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggle, p227.
41 According to De Ste Croix, in Thessaly the Penastai were also serfs rather
than slaves. Serfdom probably also existed in Crete. See G E M De Ste
Croix, Class Struggle, p150.
42 The chapter on Lycurgus in Plutach’s Lives, (for instance in E C Lindeman
(ed), Life Studies of Men Who Shaped History, Plutarch’s Lives (New
York, 1950)), provides an account of what the Spartans claimed was their
way of life. In fact the austerity may have been to a large extent an
ideological myth rather than a reality, certainly in later Sparta. See A H M
Jones, Sparta (Oxford, 1967).
43 This is the argument put in A H M Jones, The Athenium Democracy
(Oxford, 1957).
44 Quoted in G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggle, pp140-141.
45 De Ste Croix points to evidence that only 13 percent of slaves were ‘home
bred’ according to inscriptions for the years 201-153 BC.
46 R Osborne, Greece, p233.
47 See the comments in G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggles, and in The
Origins of the Peloponnesian War (London, 1972). For a full attempted
indictment of Socrates’ approach see I F Stone, The Trial of Socrates
(London, 1997).
48 This argument is spelt out at length in G E M De Ste Croix, Origins.
49 E Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (London, 1920), p1.
50 G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggle, p328.
51 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts in the Roman Republic (London, 1971), p28.
52 Sallust, The Histories, vol 1 (Oxford, 1992), p24.
53 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p51.
54 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p51.
55 G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggles, p334.
56 G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggles, p335.
57 According to P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p87.
58 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p58.
59 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p58.
60 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p58.
61 A H M Jones, The Roman Republic (London, 1974), p116.
62 Quoted by P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p15.
63 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p122.
64 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p33.
65 PA Brunt, Italian Manpower, 225 BC-AD 14 (Oxford, 1971).
66 P A Brunt, Italian Manpower, p9.
67 P A Brunt, Italian Manpower, p9.
68 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p123.
69 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p78.
70 Details in P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, and A Lintott, ‘Political History’, in
J A Cook, A Lintott and G Rawson (eds), Cambridge Ancient History, vol
IX (Cambridge, 1986), p69.
71 Again accounts of what happened are to be found in P A Brunt, Social
Conflicts, pp83-92, and A Lintott, ‘Political History’, pp77-84.
72 According to P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p92.
73 Sallust, The Histories, vol 1, p25.
74 Quoted in P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p96.
75 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p98.
76 P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p104.
77 Appian, according to P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p197.
78 See the account of their conditions in P A Brunt, Social Conflicts, p128.
79 A Lintott, ‘The Roman Empire’, in J A Cook, A Lintott and G Rawson
(eds), Cambridge Ancient History, vol IX, pp25-26.[
80 The marvellous film Spartacus with Kirk Douglas seems to take poetic
licence by portraying him on a cross.
81 Details from A Lintott, ‘Political History’, pp221-223.
82 Livy, figure quoted in G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggles, p230.
83 Quoted in G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggles, p368.
84 Quoted in G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggles, p368.
85 Quotes given in G E M De Ste Croix, Class Struggles, p355.
86 It took them no more than a couple of hours to abandon their own attempt to
re-establish the republic before the accession of Claudius.
87 According to A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p124.
88 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p127.
89 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p127.
90 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p24.
91 E Gibbon, Decline and Fall, vol 1, p89.
92 Apuleius, The Golden Ass, translated by Jack Lindsay (London, 1960),
p192.
93 Apuleius, The Golden Ass, pp206-208.
94 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p36.
95 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p39.
96 See L A Moritz, Grain Mills and Flour in Classical Antiquity (Oxford,
1958), for a full discussion on these matters, especially pp131, 136, 138
and 143.
97 Estimates given in A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p83.
98 A H M Jones, The Roman Economy, p129.
99 See G Bois, The Transformation of the Year 1000 (Manchester, 1992).
100 There is no reference in the earliest extant versions of his text. For a
translation, see Josephus, The Jewish War (London, 1981). A Slavonic
translation of a lost medieval text does contain a reference, but there is little
reason to doubt this was an ‘interpolation’ by monks embarrassed by the
lack of any reference to Jesus in a manuscript they were copying. It certainly
does not justify the way Christian writers use Josephus’s writings to back
their own versions of history.
101 Luke 18.19-26
102 Matthew 16.24
103 Luke 6.20-25
104 Matthew 5.1 and 5.6
105 Matthew 25.14-30
106 Matthew 21.20
107 His use of the word ‘proletariat’ to describe the masses of 1 st century
Judaea is itself confusing. They were very different to a modern working
class, despite being poor. Many would have been self employed
craftspeople (‘artisans’) and shopkeepers, others beggars and very few
wage workers. What is more, the gospels have Jesus preaching to and
associating with ‘publicans’ (tax collectors)—a despised, but not
necessarily poor, group. Kautsky quotes in his favour a passage in St Paul’s
First Epistle to the Corinthians in which Paul says ‘not many mighty, not
many noble, are called’. Kautsky says this means ‘property’ was not
‘represented’ in the early church. In fact, the passage actually says there
were a few ‘mighty’ and a few ‘noble’, but that the great majority did not
belong to these groups. This suggests the religion had some cross-class
appeal and certainly was not purely ‘proletarian’ even at that early stage.
108 M Goodman, ‘Judea’, in J A Cook and others (eds), Cambridge Ancient
History, vol IX, p768.
109 For the detail of these, see the earlier chapters of Josephus, The Jewish
War.
110 Josephus, Antiquities, quoted in K Kautsky, Foundations of Christianity
(New York, no date), p300.
111 Josephus, The Jewish War. The translation here is that to be found in K
Kautsky, Foundations, but it differs only slightly from the Penguin edition of
The Jewish War (London, 1981), pp126, 147.
112 Josephus, The Jewish War, (London, 1981), p148.
113 According to M Goodman, ‘Judea’, p771.
114 According to Josephus, The Jewish War.
115 W A Meeks, The First Urban Christians (New Haven, 1983), p34.
116 Quoted in K Kautsky, Foundations, p261; on the degree of proselytisation,
see also M Goodman, ‘Judea’, p779.
117 Strictly speaking Buddhism is not ‘monotheistic’ because it does not in its
earliest forms involve belief in a personal god of any sort. But it does stress
a single principle underlying all reality, and so fits in the same category as
the other religions.
118 W A Meeks suggests a figure of ‘some five to six million Jews…in the
diaspora’ in the 1 st century (see W A Meeks, The First Urban Christians
(New Haven, 1983), p34). This figure seems to be excessive, given that the
total population of the empire at the time was only about 50 million, and
only a small proportion of those lived in the towns.
119 Luke 14.26
120 Indeed, there must be more than a suspicion that the gospels are hearsay
accounts written years afterwards, lumping together quite different events,
including some of those mentioned by Josephus. If that is so, a figure called
Jesus (the Greek form of Joshua, a very common Jewish name at the time)
might have been involved in such incidents as one participant among many
—and later reports might easily have vastly exaggerated his role. Anyone
who has ever listened to participants recall events even a decade ago, such
as the poll tax riot of March 1990 or the miners’ strike six years earlier, will
know how divergent are the accounts of who did what.
121 This version of the prayer is to be found in Apuleius, The Golden Ass.
122 The estimate is by A J Malherbe, Social Aspects of Early Christianity
(Baton Rouge, 1977), p86.
123 The study is Judge’s, but is here quoted from A J Malherbe, Social
Aspects, p46.
124 See A J Malherbe, Social Aspects, p61.
125 A J Malherbe, Social Aspects, p77.
126 This is the argument of W A Meeks, The First Urban Christians, pp70-
71, 191, although he uses the sociological jargon of ‘status inconsistency’.
127 This was certainly the interpretation given to me at Sunday School!
128 I Corinthians 11.2
129 H Chadwick, The Early Church (London, 1993), p46.
130 Paul’s epistles to the Corinthians and the Colossians both take up issues
raised by the Gnostics.
131 P Brown, The World of Late Antiquity (London, 1971), p66.
132 P Brown, The World, p67.
133 For details, see H Chadwick, Early, pp135-136. Gibbon’s Decline and
Fall of the Roman Empire gives lurid details of imperial interventions and
the scale of repression throughout this period.
134 See H Chadwick, Early, p179.
Part three: The ‘Middle Ages’
1 According to J C Russell, ‘Population in Europe 500-1500’, in C M Cipolla
(ed), Fontana Economic History of Europe: The Middle Ages, p25.
2 According to P Anderson, Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism (London,
1978), p126.
3 See the excellent account of the literate culture of the period in H Waddell,
The Wandering Scholars (Harmondsworth, 1954).
4 See the summaries of the changes in J Gernet, A History, p180, and D
Twitchett, ‘Introduction’, in D Twitchett (ed), Cambridge History of China,
vol 3 (Cambridge, 1979), p5.
5 J Gernet, A History, p197.
6 J Gernet, A History, p236.
7 There is some dispute among historians as to how widespread and effective
this system of taxation was. N E McKnight argues that widespread
exemptions from the system left only 17 percent of the population paying the
tax, while the nobility and officials received much more land than the
ordinary peasant. The system would then have shifted land from the old
aristocracy to the rising layer of officials, not to the mass of people. See, N
E McKnight, ‘Fiscal Privileges and Social Order’, in J W Haeger (ed),
Crisis and Prosperity in Sung China (Tucson, 1975).
8 R M Somers, ‘The End of the T’ang’, in D Twitchett (ed), Cambridge
History of China, vol 3, p723.
9 R M Somers, ‘The End’, p723.
10 For accounts of the rebellion, see R M Somers, ‘The End’, pp733-747, and
J Gernet, A History, p267. The account in the next two paragraphs is taken
from Somers.
11 There is some debate among scholars over the character of the landed
estates. Some see them as similar to the manors of western feudalism, others
as essentially capitalist. For a brief account of the discussion, see D
Twitchett, ‘Introduction’, p27.
12 E A Kracke, ‘Sung K’ai-feng’, in J W Haeger (ed), Crisis, pp65-66.
13 Y Shiba, ‘Urbanisation and Development of Markets’, in J W Haeger (ed),
Crisis, p22.
14 E A Kracke, ‘Sung’, pp51-52.
15 J Gernet, A History, p320.
16 J Gernet, A History, pp310-311.
17 J Gernet, A History, pp334-335.
18 According to J Gernet, A History, p333.
19 Fang Ta-tsung, quoted in Y Shiba, ‘Urbanisation’.
20 D Twitchett (ed), Cambridge History of China, vol 3, p30.
21 L C J Mo, Commercial Development and Urban Change in Sung China
(Ann Arbor, 1971), pp124-125.
22 Hsia Sung, quoted in Y Shiba, ‘Urbanisation’, p42.
23 N E McKnight, ‘Fiscal Privileges’, p98. For a full account of the
development and content of the examination system, see J F Chaffee, The
Thorny Gates of Learning in Sung China (Cambridge, 1985).
24 J F Chaffee, The Thorny Gates, p3.
25 N E McKnight, ‘Fiscal Privileges’, p98 footnote.
26 This is the tone of the best known of Karl Wittfogel’s later works, Oriental
Despotism, written after he had abandoned Marxism. The theme is also
present at some points in the writings of Etienne Balazs—for instance when
he says that ‘it was the state which killed technological progress in China’
(Chinese Civilisation and Bureaucracy (Yale, 1964), p11)—although at
other points he recognises both the diversity of intellectual standpoints and
the reality of technological change. Finally, the argument occurs in David
Landes recent book, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations (London, 1998).
But upholding it means downplaying the very real economic dynamism
shown in the Sung period.
27 P B Ebrey, ‘Introduction’, in P B Ebrey, Family and Property in Sung
China: Yüan Ts’ai’s Precepts for Social Life (Princeton, 1984), p129.
28 This is a point made very well by Etienne Balazs, Chinese Civilisation,
pp8-9.
29 As Etienne Balazs, who admitted his approach was influenced by Marx as
well as Max Weber, put it, ‘the scholar-officials and the merchants formed
two hostile but interdependent classes.’, E Balazs, Chinese Civilisation,
p32.
30 L C J Mo, Commercial Development, pp140-141.
31 Quoted in L C J Mo, Commercial Development, p20.
32 Passage translated in P B Ebrey, Family, p293
33 J W Haegar, Introduction to Crisis, p8.
34 For an attempted Marxist analysis of the Mongols, see R Fox, Genghis
Khan (Castle Hedingham, 1962).
35 S Runciman, ‘The Place of Byzantium in the Medieval World’, in J M
Hussey, Cambridge Medieval History, vol IV, part II, p358.
36 The Greek name literally means ‘holy wisdom’, but St Sophia is usually
used in English.
37 A Grabor, ‘Byzantine Architecture and Art’, Cambridge Medieval History,
vol IV, part II (Cambridge, 1967), p330.
38 G Dölger, ‘Byzantine Literature’, in Cambridge Medieval History, vol IV,
part II, p208.
39 G Dölger, ‘Byzantine Literature’, p209.
40 A Grabor, ‘Byzantine Architecture and Art’, p306.
41 K Vogel, ‘Byzantine Science’, in Cambridge Medieval History, vol IV, part
II, p287.
42 K Vogel, ‘Byzantine Science’, p305.
43 See chapter 8, ‘The Physical Universe’, in C Mango, Byzantium (London,
1994), pp166-176. For a slightly more charitable account, see K Vogel,
‘Byzantine Science’, p269.
44 R J H Jenkins, ‘Social Life in the Byzantine Empire’, in Cambridge
Medieval History, vol IV, part II, p93.
45 H St L B Moss, ‘Formation of the Eastern Roman Empire’, in Cambridge
Medieval History, vol IV, part I, p38.
46 P Brown, The World of Late Antiquity (London, 1971), p157.
47 P Brown, The World, p104.
48 R J H Jenkins, ‘Social Life’, p97.
49 R J H Jenkins, ‘Social Life’, p98.
50 R J H Jenkins, ‘Social Life’, p84.
51 R J H Jenkins, ‘Social Life’, p89.
52 Some historians have suggested that the different factions represented
different political, class or religious interests. But Alan Cameron has
provided a mass of evidence to back up his case that they cut across class
and religious divisions, and deflected attention from issues which might
have threatened the empire. The partial exception was the Nike riot, when
the Blue and Green factions, upset by Justinian’s decision to execute a rioter
from either side, issued a united declaration against him. But even in this
case, as we have seen, the riot was not of the poor against the rich. See A
Cameron, Blues and Greens: Circus Factions at Rome and Byzantium
(London, 1976).
53 See A Cameron, Blues and Greens, and R J H Jenkins, ‘Social Life’, p86.
54 J B Bury, ‘Introduction’ to Cambridge Medieval History, vol IV, pxix.
55 R J H Jenkins, ‘Social Life’, p88.
56 Known to the Romans as Arabia Felix (Happy Arabia) and today called
Yemen.
57 For a full account of the expansion and neglect of the Mesopotamian
irrigation systems, which points out that the blame lay not just with war but
also with ‘oppressive taxation’ and ‘the devolution of authority into the
hands of the landed nobility’, see R M Adams, Land Behind Baghdad
(Chicago, 1965), pp69, 80-82.
58 The analogy is Bernard Lewis’s, in B Lewis, The Arabs in History
(London, 1966), p55.
59 The analogy is Peter Brown’s, in P Brown, The World, pp192-193.
60 Both quoted in B Lewis, The Arabs, p58.
61 See, for instance, P Brown, The World, p200.
62 B Lewis, The Arabs, p72. For a detailed account of the disputes among the
Arab armies, see the chapter, ‘The Islamic Opposition’, in M G S Hodgson,
The Venture of Islam, vol 1, Classical Age of Islam (Chicago, 1974).
63 B Lewis, The Arabs, p80.
64 B Lewis, The Arabs, p80.
64a According to B Lewis, ‘Government, Society and Economic Life Under
the Abbasids and Fatamids’, in Cambridge Medieval History, vol IV, part
1, p643. See also S D Gotein, Studies in Islamic History and Institutions
(London, 1966), pp221-240.
65 B Lewis, The Arabs, p81.
66 B Lewis, The Arabs, p86.
67 B Lewis, The Arabs, p91.
68 See his argument in M Rodinson, Islam and Capitalism (London, 1974).
69 B Lewis, The Arabs, p91.
70 G E von Grunebaum, ‘Muslim Civilisation in the Abbasid Period’, in
Cambridge Medieval History, vol IV, part I, p679.
71 M G S Hodgson, The Venture of Islam, vol II (Chicago, 1972), p65.
72 R M Adams, Land Behind Baghdad, p?.
73 R M Adams, Land Behind Baghdad, p87.
74 Yaqut, quoted in R M Adams, Land Behind Baghdad, p87. See also
Adams’s account of what happened throughout the irrigated area, pp99-106.
75 Quoted by G E von Grunebaum, ‘Muslim Civilisation’, p693.
76 He did so precisely by analysing the dynamic of rise, revolution and
decline in the previous 700 years of Islamic civilisation. See Ibn Khaldun,
The Muqaddimah (London, 1987).
77 See, for example, G E von Grunebaum, ‘Muslim Civilisation’, p682.
78 Quoted in B Davidson, Africa in History (London, 1992), p61.
79 Quoted in G Connah, African Civilisations (Cambridge, 1987), p183.
80 H Trevor-Roper (Lord Dacre), quoted in A Callinicos, Theories and
Narratives (Cambridge, 1995), p167.
81 See, for example, K W Butzer, Early Hydraulic Civilisation in Egypt
(Chicago, 1976), pp9-12; M Stone, Egypt’s Making (London, 1991), pp27-
29; and for a report on ‘megalith’ monuments in southern Egypt around
4,500 BC, see ‘Tribe In Sahara Were The First To Aim For The Stars’, in
the Guardian, 2 April 1998.
82 Quoted in G Connah, African, p150.
83 Leo Africanus, History and Development of Africa, vol 1 (London, 1896).
For an excellent fictional recreation of his journeys, see A Maalouf, Leo the
African (London, 1994).
84 See D W Phillipson, African Archaeology (Cambridge, 1985), p170; Jared
Diamond goes so far as to argue, ‘African smiths discovered how to
produce high temperatures in their village furnaces and manufacture steel
2,000 years before the Bessemer furnaces of 19 th century Europe and
America.’ (J Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel, p394). M J van der Merwe
and T A Wertime believe knowledge of iron making originally diffused
across the Sahara from the Mediterranean coastal regions, but recognise that
African smiths developed techniques which led to the direct making of steel
rather than wrought iron. See their essays in T A Wertime and J D Munly
(eds), The Coming of the Age of Iron (New Haven, 1980).
85 G Connah, African Civilisations, p213.
86 J Diamond, Guns, pp177-191.
87 See the details given from research among documents from Cairo’s
synagogue in S D Coitein, Studies in Islamic History and Institutions
(Leiden, 1966), p297.
88 G Duby, Rural Economy and Country Life in the Medieval West (London,
1968), p5.
89 This, for instance, is part of the explanation of David Landes in his often
acclaimed book, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations.
90 The so called ‘political Marxists’, Robert Brenner and Ellen Meiksins
Wood. See, for instance, Robert Brenner’s own essay in T Ashton (ed), The
Brenner Debate (Cambridge, 1993).
91 L White, ‘The Expansion of Technology 500-1500’, in C Cipolla (ed),
Fontana Economic History of Europe, vol 1, The Middle Ages (London,
1972), p147. See also G Duby, Rural Economy, pp18-19.
92 L White, ‘The Expansion’, p149.
93 L White, ‘The Expansion’, p146.
94 G Duby, ‘Medieval Agriculture’, in C Cipolla (ed), Fontana, pp196-197.
In fact the advances in productivity in Ch’en and T’ang China may have
been as great as these in Europe, but this does not detract from the
importance of what happened.
95 S Thrupp, ‘Medieval Industry’, in C Cipolla (ed), Fontana, p225.
96 P Kriedte (ed), Industrialisation Before Industrialisation (Cambridge,
1981), p19.
97 J Le Goff, Medieval Civilisation (Oxford, 1988), p59.
98 M Bloch, Feudal Society (London, 1965), p346.
99 J Le Goff, Medieval Civilisation, p198.
100 See G Bois, The Transformation of the Year 1000 (Manchester, 1992).
For a critical discussion of his views, see my review of the work, ‘Change
at the First Millennium’, International Socialism 62 (Spring 1994).
101 J Le Goff, ‘The Town as an Agent of Civilisation’, in C M Cipolla (ed),
Fontana, p79. For the role of such small towns newly established on lords’
estates in England, see R Hilton, ‘Lords, Burgesses and Hucksters’, in Past
and Present, November 1982.
102 See, for instance, the list of translations of scientific texts into Latin from
the Arabic, in J Gimpel, The Medieval Machine (London, 1992), pp176-
177.
103 Quoted in J Gimpel, Medieval, p174.
104 Quoted in J Gimpel, Medieval, p174.
105 See J Gimpel, Medieval, pp192-193.
106 L White, ‘The Expansion’, p156.
107 Southern Belgium and the northernmost strip of France.
108 For a full account, see S Runciman, The Sicilian Vespers.
109 R Roehl, ‘Pattern and Structure of Demand 1000-1500’, in C Cipolla (ed),
Fontana, p133.
110 The standard history of the Crusades is Stephen Runciman’s three volume
work, A History of the Crusades (Harmondsworth, 1990). The BBC
paperback by Terry Jones and Alan Ereira, The Crusades (London, 1996)
provides an easy overview. The fact that the Crusaders were able to
conquer the lands of a civilisation that was far more advanced than Europe
was a result of the new techniques employed in European agriculture—a
sign of material advance. But this did not alter the destructive and wasteful
character of the Crusades for all involved.
111 G Bois, The Crisis of Feudalism (Cambridge, 1984), p1. There were, in
fact, probably historic precedents just as serious—in, for instance, the
crises which hit the early ancient civilisations or Medieval Mesopotamia.
112 G Duby, ‘Medieval Agriculture’, p192.
113 R Hilton, Class Conflict and the Crisis of Feudalism (London, 1990),
p171. See also G Bois, The Crisis, pp1-5.
114 The phrase used by both Bois and Hilton.
115 Quoted in J-P Poly and E Bournazel, The Feudal Transformation (New
York, 1991), p119.
116 R Hilton, Class Conflict, p65.
117 For a summary account of events, see S A Epstein, Wage Labor and
Guilds in Medieval Europe (North Carolina, 1991), pp252-253.
118 N Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium (London, 1970), p102.
119 N Cohn, Pursuit, p103.
120 N Cohn, Pursuit, p104.
121 N Cohn, Pursuit, pp139-141.
122 Now the north western part of the Czech Republic.
123 The quotes are given in N Cohn, Pursuit, p215. For a much more
sympathetic account of the Taborite movement, which does not see it as
simply a question of irrational longings, see K Kautsky, Communism in
Central Europe in the Time of the Reformation, translated by J L and E G
Mulliken (London, 1897, reprinted New York, 1966).
124 See, for example, C Hibbert, The Rise and Fall of the Medicis (London,
1979).
125 See G Duby, ‘Medieval Agriculture’, p182.
126 Fernand Braudel gives a full account of the various international networks
in chapter 2, ‘Markets and the Economy’, of F Braudel, The Wheels of
Commerce, Civilisation and Capitalism in the 15 th-18 th Century, vol 2
(London, 1979),
127 G Duby, ‘Medieval Agriculture’, p193. For instances of urban traders
going further and beginning to become considerable holders of agricultural
land, see G Bois, The Crisis, p153.
Part four: The great transformation
1 Bernal Diaz’s description of the view as Cortes’s troops arrived at
Itztapalapa on the shores of the Lake of Mexico, quoted in F Katz, Ancient
American Civilisations (London, 1989), p179.
2 Cortes’s description of Tenochtitlan and its market at Tlatelolco, quoted in F
Katz, Ancient, p180.
3 An account of the Inca capital Cuzco by one of the Spanish conquerors,
quoted in J Hemmings, The Conquest of Peru (London, 1970), pp120-121.
4 Columbus’s arguments are presented in The Life of Admiral Christopher
Columbus by his Son Ferdinand, translated by Benjamin Keen (New
Brunswick, 1992), pp15-28.
5 On Columbus’s religious mysticism, see K Sale, The Conquest of Paradise
(New York, 1991), p189.
6 A description of the first indigenous peoples encountered in the Caribbean by
Christopher Columbus’s sailors, from The Life of Admiral Christopher
Columbus, pp60, 69.
7 Quoted in K Sale, Paradise, p181.
8 Letter’s text in The Life of Admiral Christopher Columbus, p82.
9 The Life of Admiral Christopher Columbus, p71.
10 Quoted in K Sale, Paradise, p110.
11 On Columbus and the ‘Caribs’, see K Sale, Paradise, p130. There have
been widespread doubts among anthropologists about the exact prevalence
of cannibalism. The firm evidence seems to be that cannibalism as a
general way of getting food has never existed, except at times of mass
starvation (when it has even occurred in ‘advanced’ 20 th century societies).
‘Ritual’ eating of certain parts of dead people has been a feature very
occasionally found among a few early societies based upon horticulture.
12 The Life of Admiral Christopher Columbus, p109.
13 According to Las Casas, who lived on the island for several years as a
colonist before becoming a priest, quoted in K Sale, Paradise, p155.
14 One estimate, by Sherburne Cook and Woodrow Borah, suggests it could
have been eight million. See K Sale, Paradise, p161.
15 Quoted in K Sale, Paradise, p159.
16 K Sale, Paradise, p182.
17 See K Sale, Paradise, p180.
18 Quoted in F Katz, Ancient, p324.
19 R C Padden, The Hummingbird and the Hawk: Conquest and Sovereignty
in the Valley of Mexico 1503-1541 (New York, 1970), p74. See also the
account of class divisions, imperial expansion and religion in F Katz,
Ancient, pp134-243.
20 Now the Almeda palace in central Mexico City.
21 V Gordon Childe, ‘The Bronze Age’, in Past and Present (1956).
22 J Diamond, Guns, Germs and Steel.
23 Quoted in F Katz, Ancient, p334.
24 Quoted in W H Prescott, The Conquest of Peru (New York, 1961), p251.
25 According to W H Prescott, Conquest, p251. See also F Katz, Ancient,
p334.
26 Description and figures given by W H Prescott, Conquest, p253.
27 According to the account of Pedro Pizarro, quoted in F Katz, Ancient, p335.
28 Quoted in J Hemmings, Peru, p178.
29 Decree quoted in J Hemmings, Peru, p129.
30 J Hemmings, Peru, p365.
31 J Hemmings, Peru, p113.
32 J Hemmings, Peru, p376.
33 Quoted in J Hemmings, Peru, p347.
34 Fernando de Almellones, quoted in J Hemmings, Peru, p348.
35 Details in J Hemmings, Peru, p407.
36 Marx and Engels described it variously as a ‘balance between the nobility
and the burghers’ (F Engels, The Origins of the Family (London, 1998),
p211); as ‘an equilibrium between the landowning aristocracy and the
bourgeoisie’ (F Engels, The Housing Question in K Marx and F Engels,
Collected Works, vol 23 (London, 1988), p363); as ‘serving nascent middle
class society as a mighty weapon in its struggle against feudalism’ (K Marx,
The Civil War in France (London, 1996), p75); as ‘a product of bourgeois
development’ (K Marx, Capital, vol 1 (Moscow, 1986), p672). By contrast,
Perry Anderson describes it as ‘a redeployed and recharged apparatus of
feudal domination…the political carapace of a threatened nobility’ (P
Anderson, Lineages of the Absolutist State (London, 1974), p18). But if it
was ‘redeployed’ or ‘recharged’ feudalism, it was through the monarchy
relying on the market and leaning on the urban upper class—that is, by
basing itself on elements of capitalism as well as elements of feudalism.
37 The term is Marx’s, in K Marx, Capital, vol 1, p686.
38 Statutes named and quoted in K Marx, Capital, vol 1, pp686-687.
39 For details, see H Heller, The Conquest of Poverty: the Calvinist Revolt
in 16 th Century France (London, 1986), p27.
40 A G Dickens, ‘The Shape of Anti-Clericalism and the English
Reformation’, in E I Kouri and T Scott, Politics and Society in
Reformation Europe (London, 1987), p381.
41 See, for instance, R S Duplessis, Transitions to Capitalism in Early
Modern Europe (Cambridge, 1997), p93.
42 At points in his numerous writings, Weber attempts to produce such an
explanation in terms of the interaction of multiple factors, but he never
provided a coherent account. His writings are more like footnotes to history
than an account of the real historical process.
43 This is an argument even accepted by Perry Anderson in his P Anderson,
Lineages.
44 Witold Kula gives a brilliant exposition of the dynamic and contradictions
of the economy which emerged in Poland and, by implication, in many other
parts of Europe in this period, in W Kula, Economics of the Feudal System
(London, 1987). Despite its title, this book is about what I call ‘market
feudalism’, not the classic feudalism of the earlier Middle Ages. It shows
how the drive of the lords to buy the new goods created in the advanced
industries of Britain, Holland and elsewhere could lead to stagnation, and
even undermine agriculture. I suspect these conclusions apply also, at least
in part, to other societies with both ‘use value’ and ‘exchange value’ sectors
—such as Sung China, Abbasid Mesopotamia and Mogul India.
45 Quoted in G Mülder, ‘Martin Luther and the Political World of his Time’, in
E I Kouri and T Scott, Politics and Society in Restoration Europe, p37.
46 H Heller, Poverty, p131.
47 That is, ‘prince’.
48 See especially, T A Brady, The Politics of the Reformation in Germany
(New Jersey, 1997); P Blickle, Communal Reformation (London, 1992); J
Abray, The People’s Reformation (Oxford, 1985).
49 P Blickle, Communal, p63.
50 P Blickle, Communal, p73.
51 P Blickle, Communal, p84.
52 G R Elton, Reformation Europe (Glasgow, 1963), pp53-54.
53 T A Brady, The Politics, p80.
54 G R Elton, Reformation Europe, p64.
55 Quoted in A G Dickens, The Age of Humanism and Reformation (London,
1977), p152.
56 P Blickle, Communal, p88.
57 P Blickle, Communal, p12.
58 P Blickle, Communal, p13. For a full account, together with translations of
documents, see T Scott and B Scribner (eds), The German Peasants’ War
(London, 1991).
59 For a full account of the typical response of a town oligarch, Jacob Sturm of
Strasbourg, see T A Brady, The Politics, pp82-86.
60 P Blickle, Communal, p13.
61 T A Brady, The Politics, p83. Frederick Engels’ 1850 account, The
Peasant War in Germany contains a detailed description of the movement
in different regions, in K Marx and F Engels, Collected Works, vol 10
(London, 1978), pp399-477. For a Marxist history which pays less attention
to the details of battles, see E Belfort Bax, The Peasants’ War in Germany
(London, 1899).
62 The 12 points are printed in T Scott and B Scribner (eds), The German
Peasants’ War, pp252-257.
63 P Blickle, Communal, p50.
64 G R Elton, Reformation Europe, p59.
65 F Engels, The Peasant War, p449.
66 Villagers in Shaffhausen, quoted in P Blickle, Communal, p48.
67 G R Elton, Reformation Europe, p59.
68 Quoted in F Engels, The Peasant War, p419.
69 Quoted in L Febvre, Martin Luther (London, 1930), p258.
70 Quoted in L Febvre, Martin Luther, p258.
71 P Blickle, Communal, p199.
72 Quoted in K Kautsky, Communism in Central Europe in the Time of the
Reformation (New York, 1966), p136.
73 G R Elton, Reformation Europe, pp58, 94.
74 Most famously in the case of Goetz von Berlichingen.
75 Quoted in P Blickle, Communal, p200.
76 H Heller, Poverty, p137.
77 H Heller, Poverty, p70.
78 Honore de Balzac, About Catherine de Medici (London, 1910), p59.
79 H Heller, Poverty, p175.
80 H Heller, Poverty, p139.
81 H Heller, Poverty, p172.
82 The centrepiece of the recent much acclaimed film, La Reine Margot.
83 H Heller, Poverty, pp246-247.
84 G B Elton, in his standard work Reformation Europe, can claim, ‘Nowhere
did it [Calvinism] owe its original reception or its wider successes to…to
any imagined advantages for middle class economic ambitions’, p234.
85 This certainly happened to their ‘foreign’ allies. There was bitter
opposition in Strasbourg—still then part of the empire—to an alliance with
Calvinist nobles who wanted to buy the bishopric of the town for one of
their juvenile kin. See J Abray, The People’s Reformation.
86 For a very good selection of the contending interpretations, see T K Rabb
(ed), The Thirty Years War (Boston, 1965).
87 They also played an important part in the progress of science and
technology by carrying knowledge of certain post-Renaissance European
discoveries to China. See C A Ronan and L Needham, The Shorter Science
and Civilisation of China, vol 4 (Cambridge, 1994), p220.
88 A G Dickens, The Age of Humanism and Reformation in Europe (London,
1977), p202.
89 H V Polisensky, The Thirty Years War (London, 1974), p28.
90 H V Polisensky, Thirty, p31.
91 Adherents to the Hussite belief that priests had no special part to play in the
communion rites.
92 H V Polisensky, Thirty, p47.
93 G Parker, Europe in Crisis, 1598-1648 (London, 1984), p168.
94 Quoted in G Parker, Europe in Crisis, p168.
95 For details of this connection, see H V Polisensky, Thirty, pp141, 186-187.
96 See the comments of the German Marxist Franz Mehring, writing 90 years
ago, in F Mehring, Absolutism and Revolution in Germany, 1525-1848
(London, 1975), p28.
97 The assassination—and the way in which Wallenstein’s own vacillations
allowed it to happen—form the basis of two plays by the German
Enlightenment writer Frederick Schiller, The Piccolomini and The Death of
Wallenstein, in F Schiller, Historical and Dramatic Works, vol 2 (London,
1980).
98 H V Polisensky, Thirty, p197.
99 See H V Polisensky, Thirty, p245.
100 See H V Polisensky, Thirty, pp245-247 for a full account of the
deterioration in Bohemia’s economic and cultural life.
101 For arguments over the degree of damage done by the war, see the pieces
by G Pages, S H Steinberg, H V Polisensky and T K Rabb, in T K Rabb
(ed), The Thirty Years War.
102 Although a good deal of the shock among the ruling classes was
hypocritical since, as Voltaire later pointed out in his Lettres
Philosophiques, several European monarchs had been executed previously.
103 According to C Hill, ‘The English Revolution and the Brotherhood of
Man’, in C Hill, Puritanism and Revolution (London, 1968), p126.
104 Quoted by C Hill, God’s Englishman (Harmondsworth, 1973), p87.
105 R S Duplessis, Transitions, p68; see also G Parker, Europe in Crisis,
table 1, p23.
106 See R S Duplessis, Transitions, pp113-115.
107 John Dillingham to Lord Montagu, quoted in A Fletcher, The Outbreak of
the English Civil War (London, 1981), p182.
108 A Fletcher, The Outbreak, p182.
109 John Tailor in his New Preacher News tract, quoted in A Fletcher, The
Outbreak, p175.
110 Quoted in C Hill, God’s Englishman, p62.
111 Quoted in C Hill, The Century of Revolution, 1603-1714 (London, 1969),
p116.
112 This summary of one of his addresses is provided by I Gentles, The New
Model Army (Oxford, 1992), p84.
113 C Hill, God’s Englishman, pp68-69.
114 Quoted in I Gentles, New Model Army, p160.
115 See I Gentles, New Model Army, pp161-163.
116 Quoted in I Gentles, New Model Army, p209.
117 Quoted in I Gentles, New Model Army, p209.
118 Quoted in B Manning, The Crisis of the English Revolution (London,
1992), p108.
119 Quoted in C Hill, God’s Englishman, p105.
120 Quoted in I Gentles, New Model Army, p330.
121 C Hill, God’s Englishman, p97.
122 According to C Hill, The Century of Revolution, p181.
123 The town known today known as ‘Old Goa’.
124 Close to the present day town of Hampi.
125 Quoted by V A Smith, The Oxford History of India (Oxford, 1985), p312.
126 These are the battles depicted in Kurasawa’s film Ran.
127 J Gernet, A History of Chinese Civilisation (Cambridge, 1996), p424.
See also, ‘Introduction’ to F W Mote and D Twitchett (eds), Cambridge
History of China, vol 7 (Cambridge, 1988), pp508-509.
128 J Gernet, History, p426.
129 J Gernet, History, p442. Just as medieval Europe had learnt from China,
Chinese intellectuals and technicians were now acquiring, from a Jesuit
mission in Beijing, advances in knowledge from post-Renaissance Europe.
See C A Ronan and J Needham, The Shorter Science and Civilisation of
China, vol 4 (Cambridge, 1994), pp220-221.
130 J Gernet, History, p440.
131 J Gernet, History, p437.
132 J Gernet, History, p446.
133 Although Ronan and Needham (see C A Ronan and J Needham, Shorter
Science, pp1, 34) suggest the influence of the European Renaissance was of
vital importance in 17 th century China.
134 J Gernet, History, p425.
135 J Gernet, History, p426.
136 J Gernet, History, p426.
137 F W Mote and D Twitchett, Cambridge, vol 7, p587.
138 Estimates given in J Gernet, History, p429, and F W Mote and D
Twitchett, Cambridge, vol 7, p586.
139 F W Mote and D Twitchett, Cambridge, vol 7, p586
140 Quoted in F Mote and D Twitchett, Cambridge, vol 7, p631.
141 F W Mote and D Twitchett, Cambridge, vol 7, p632.
142 This is the argument of Geoffrey Parker in G Parker, Europe in Crisis,
pp17-22.
143 F W Mote and D Twitchett, Cambridge, vol 7, p587.
144 The reason for ending the voyages was not only resistance to the growth of
merchant influence. The voyages were costly to the state and China had little
need of the sorts of goods to be found in the Indian Ocean—or for that
matter in Europe. The empire exported much more than it imported until the
rise of the opium trade in the 19 th century.
145 F W Mote and D Twitchett, Cambridge, vol 7, p518.
146 J Gernet, History, p431.
147 According to J Gernet, History, p432.
148 For details, see J Gernet, History, pp432-433.
149 J Gernet, History, p483.
150 Figures given in J Gernet, History, p489.
151 J Gernet, History, p464.
152 J Gernet, History, p497.
153 See J Gernet, History, pp497-505—although Gernet himself, for some
reason, uses the term ‘enlightened’ to describe the culture of the subsequent
period of acceptance of Manchu rule.
154 J Gernet, History, p505.
155 J Gernet, History, p507.
156 Details from J Gernet, History, p508.
157 J Gernet, History, p509.
158 See J Gernet, History, for a much fuller account of the symptoms of crisis.
159 One mistake of Marx in his writings on India was to overemphasise the
importance of these. Irfan Habib, who is otherwise complimentary about
these writings, insists, ‘Despite Marx, it is impossible to believe that the
state’s construction and control of irrigation works was a prominent feature
of the agrarian life of Moghul India.’ I Habib, The Agrarian System of
Mughal India (London, 1963), p256.
160 For a more detailed account of the relation between the Mogul officials
and the zamindars, see I Habib, Agrarian, pp66, 153-185.
161 Manriques, quoted in I Habib, Agrarian, pp322-323.
162 I Habib, Agrarian, p250. The state took much more of the surplus than did
the zamindars. See I Habib, Agrarian, p153.
163 H K Naqvi, Mughal Hindustan: Cities and Industries, 1556-1803
(Karachi, 1974).
164 According to S Maqvi, ‘Marx on Pre-British Indian Society’, in D D
Kosambi Commemoration Committee (eds), Essays in Honour of D D
Kosambi, Science and Human Progress (Bombay, 1974).
165 H K Naqvi, Mughal, p2.
166 According to H K Naqvi, Mughal, p18.
167 H K Naqvi, Mughal, p22; I Habib, Agrarian, p75.
168 I Habib, Agrarian, p76.
169 I Habib, ‘Problems in Marxist Historical Analysis’, in D D Kosambi, p73.
170 H K Naqvi, Mughal, p155.
171 H K Naqvi, Mughal, p171.
172 I Habib, ‘Problems’, p46.
173 Pelsaert, quoted in I Habib, Agrarian, p190.
174 I Habib, Agrarian, p77.
175 D D Kosambi, ‘Introduction’, in D D Kosambi, p387. Kosambi uses the
term ‘feudalism’ to describe society in this period. Irfan Habib denies the
validity of this after at least 1200 AD, given the absence of serfdom and of a
real landlord class, with the great mass of the surplus being changed into
money to pay taxes. See I Habib, ‘Problems’, p46.
176 I Habib, Agrarian, p320.
177 Quoted in I Habib, Agrarian, p321.
178 I Habib, Agrarian, p328.
179 Aurangzeb deposed his father and locked him in a tower in Agra’s fort,
from which he could see his magnificent monument (and folly), the Taj
Mahal.
180 A contemporary witness, quoted in H K Naqvi, Mughal, p23.
181 Quoted in I Habib, Agrarian, p330.
182 Details in I Habib, Agrarian, p333
183 I Habib, Agrarian, p333.
184 I Habib, Agrarian, p333.
185 I Habib, Agrarian, p333.
186 H K Naqvi, Mughal, p18.
187 Quoted in I Habib, Agrarian, p339.
188 I Habib, Agrarian, pp344-345.
189 I Habib, Agrarian, p346.
190 I Habib, Agrarian, p333.
191 There are significant arguments among historians of India over the why the
bourgeoisie did not assert itself. Some argue that it was simply too weak
because of the economic stagnation. Others argue it did not fight
independently because it saw the East India Company as a tool for
achieving its goals. I am not knowledgeable enough to comment on this
controversy. I do not think it alters the fundamental point—that it failed to
act independently and then suffered because the East India Company acted
according to goals arrived at in London, not India.
192 I Habib, Agrarian, p351.
Part five: The spread of the new order
1 See, for instance, G Rudé, Europe in the Eighteenth Century (Harvard,
1985), p23, and R S Duplessis, Transitions to Capitalism in Early Modern
Europe (Cambridge, 1997), p174.
2 See, for instance, G Rudé, Europe, p23; and R S Duplessis, Transitions,
p174.
3 Figures from R S Duplessis, Transitions, pp242, 248.
4 D Defoe, A Tour Through the Whole Island of Great Britain (London,
1912), quoted in G Rudé, Europe, p58.
5 For a summary account of these inventions, see D Landes, Wealth, pp187-
191.
6 Figures in R S Duplessis, Transitions, pp88, 242.
7 J de L Mann, The Cloth Industry in the West of England (Oxford, 1971),
pp23, 90-91.
8 Keith Thomas provides a lengthy but very accessible account of all these
beliefs and how they fitted into people’s experience of material life. See K
Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic (Harmondsworth, 1978) and
also C Ginsburg, Night Battles (Baltimore, 1983).
9 For a very accessible account of the development outlined in this paragraph,
see I B Cohen, The Birth of the New Physics (London, 1961).
10 Quoted in G de Santillana, The Age of Adventure (New York, 1956), p158.
11 See K Thomas, Religion.
12 For the limitations of Galileo’s account—and for the problematic nature of
some of his experiments—see I B Cohen, Birth, pp91-129.
13 I B Cohen, Birth, p158. Robert Munchenbled argues that the spread of
witchcraft prosecutions was a result of attempts by the groups who
controlled the state to establish their control over the rural population. See,
for instance, R Munchenbled, Sorcèries, Justice et Société (Paris, 1987),
pp9-10.
14 K Thomas, Religion, p598.
15 See K Thomas, Religion, pp533, 537.
16 According to C Hill, A Century of Revolution, p250.
17 Quoted in K Thomas, Religion, p692.
18 This can lead to differing accounts of what exactly constituted the
Enlightenment. So, for example, Ernst Cassirer (E Cassirer, The Philosophy
of the Enlightenment (Boston, 1955)) counts the rationalist philosophers
from Descartes onwards as part of the Enlightenment; by contrast George
Rudé (G Rudé, Europe) sees the Enlightenment as starting with a reaction,
inspired by John Locke, against these philosophers.
19 Leibniz accepted Newton’s mathematical formulations, but rejected his
overall model of the universe.
20 For an account of the salons, see P Naville, D’Holbach et la Philosophie
Scientifique au XVIIIe Siècle (Paris, 1967), pp46-48.
21 Quoted in P Naville, Philosophie, p118-119.
22 According to G Rudé, Europe, p131.
23 G Rudé, Europe, p132.
24 P Naville, Philosophie, p73.
25 D Outram, The Enlightenment (Cambridge, 1995), p75. By contrast the
Swedish naturalist Linnaeus laid down a tight division into four races based
on colour.
26 G Rudé, Europe, pp135-136. The motive of the monarchies was to ensure
their own control over the national churches. The effect, however, was to
weaken a major institution propagating reactionary ideas.
27 Quoted in P Gay, The Enlightenment (New York, 1977), p71.
28 R Darnton, The Business of the Enlightenment (Harvard, 1979), p528.
29 R Darnton, Business, p526.
30 According to G Rudé, Europe, p170.
31 I Kant, quoted in G Rudé, Europe, p171.
32 Jakarta.
33 This is Blackburn’s estimate in R Blackburn, The Making of New World
Slavery (London, 1997), p3. There are other estimates which are a little
smaller or a little larger. For a long discussion of the numbers involved, see
P Manning, Slavery and African Life (Cambridge, 1990), p104.
34 P Manning, Slavery, p35.
35 P Manning, Slavery, p30.
36 See A Calder, Revolutionary Empire (New York, 1981), pp257-258;
Robert Louis Stephenson’s novel Kidnapped begins with such a kidnapping
in mid-18 th century Scotland.
37 R Blackburn, Making, p230.
38 A Calder, Revolutionary, p566.
39 Barry Unsworth’s novel, Sacred Hunger (London, 1992), provides a very
good feeling of what the slaves and the sailors had in common.
40 A Calder, Revolutionary, p289.
41 R Blackburn, Making, p231.
42 For details, see R Blackburn, Making, pp240-241.
43 So Blackburn’s acount of the rebellion (in R Blackburn, Making, pp256-
258) stresses the involvement of African slaves, while Calder (A Calder,
Revolutionary, pp311-312) only refers to the anti-Indian dimension and
does not mention the slave involvement.
44 R Blackburn, Making, p264.
45 There is a black and white reproduction of this painting in R Blackburn,
Making, p32.
46 See R Blackburn, Making, pp254-255, pp264-265.
47 J Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (Oxford, 1975),
pp606-607, quoted in R Blackburn, Making, p329.
48 This, for instance, was the argument made by Francis Moore, a former
factor for the Royal Africa Company in Gambia, in a work published in
1738. See A Calder, Revolutionary, p454.
49 Many of the best known Enlightenment figures, like Adam Smith, Condorcet
and Benjamin Franklin, opposed slavery, even if some, like Hume, accepted
the notion of the innate mental inferiority of Africans.
50 W E Washburn and B Trigger, ‘Native Peoples in Euro-American
Historiography’, in W E Washburn and B Trigger (eds), Cambridge History
of Native Peoples of the Americas, vol 1, part 1 (Cambridge, 1996), p74.
51 W E Washburn and B Trigger, ‘Native’, p75.
52 W E Washburn and B Trigger, ‘Native’, p79.
53 W E Washburn and B Trigger, ‘Native’, p80.
54 P Manning, Slavery, p13. There is a very useful summary of the different
arguments in R Blackburn, Making, ch 12.
55 P Matthias, The First Industrial Nation (London, 1983), p168.
56 The pattern of trade was, of course, more complicated than this. But it sums
up certain essential features.
57 P Manning, Slavery, p22.
58 P Manning, Slavery, p34.
59 P Manning, Slavery, p85.
60 P Manning, Slavery, p23.
61 For Smith’s relations with the European Enlightenment, see I Simpson Ross,
The Life of Adam Smith (Oxford, 1995).
62 A Smith, The Wealth of Nations (Harmondsworth, 1982), p433.
63 A Smith, Wealth, pp104, 133.
64 A Smith, Wealth, pp430-431.
65 A Smith, Wealth, p488.
66 E Roll, History of Economic Thought (London, 1962), p151.
67 A Smith, Wealth, p168
68 A Smith, Wealth, p169.
Part six: The world turned upside down
1 See E Wright, Benjamin Franklin and the American Revolution, pp71, 90.
2 R A Ryerson, The Revolution Has Now Begun; the Radical Committees in
Philadelphia, 1765-76 (Pennsylvania, 1978), pp3-4.
3 E Countryman, The American Revolution (London, 1986), p71.
4 Theodore Draper has documented this at length in his A Struggle for Power
(London, 1996).
5 E Countryman, American Revolution, p97.
6 E Countryman, American Revolution, pp98, 100.
7 E Countryman, American Revolution, p100.
8 E Countryman, American Revolution, p103.
9 E Countryman, American Revolution, p103, and E Countryman, A People in
Revolution (Baltimore, 1981), p30.
10 E Countryman, American Revolution, p103.
11 Quoted in E Wright, Benjamin Franklin, p116.
12 Quoted in E Countryman, American Revolution, pp70-71.
13 E Countryman, American Revolution, p4.
14 E Countryman, American Revolution, pp113-114.
15 E Countryman, A People, pp102, 125-126.
16 E Countryman, A People, p102. See also his account of Massachusetts in E
Countryman, American Revolution, p118, and R A Ryerson’s account of
Philadelphia in The Revolution.
17 Quoted in J Keane, Tom Paine, a Political Life (London, 1995).
18 Quoted in J Keane, Tom Paine, p125.
19 E Countryman, A People, p150.
20 Figure given in E Countryman, A People, p221.
21 E Countryman, American Revolution, p162.
22 E Countryman, American Revolution, p71.
23 So in Jefferson’s first draft of the Declaration of Independence there was a
garbled attack on the monarchy for encouraging slavery and then urging the
slaves to rebel. See E Countryman, American Revolution, p71.
24 R R Palmer, ‘Social and Psychological Foundation of the Revolutionary
Era’, in A Goodwin (ed), Cambridge New Modern History, vol VIII
(Cambridge, 1965), p422.
25 Quoted in P McGarr, ‘The Great French Revolution’, in Marxism and the
Great French Revolution, International Socialism 43 (June 1989), p40.
26 Quoted, among other places, in P McGarr, ‘The Great French Revolution’,
p48.
27 The saying is famously credited to Danton in Georg Buechner’s 1835 play
Danton’s Death. In fact it seems to have originated with the Girondin
Vergninaud a year before the break between Danton and Robespierre,
arguing for harsh punishment for bread rioters.
28 L Madelin, Talleyrand (London, 1948), p12.
29 A Soboul, The French Revolution 1787-99 (London, 1989), p37.
30 R S Duplessis, Transitions to Capitalism in Early Modern Europe
(Cambridge, 1997), p242.
31 R S Duplessis, Transitions, p237.
32 The most notable of the recent ‘revisionists’ is F Furet, Interpreting the
French Revolution (Cambridge, 1981).
33 A Soboul, French Revolution, p99.
34 Quoted in A Soboul, French Revolution, p255.
35 Quoted in A Soboul, French Revolution, p307.
36 A Soboul, French Revolution, p309.
37 Quoted in A Soboul, French Revolution, p325.
38 For details of the loans and taxes, see P Kropotkin, The Great French
Revolution (London, 1971), pp410-411.
39 G Lefebvre, The French Revolution, vol II (New York, 1964), p57.
40 According to P Kropotkin, The Great, p404.
41 Quoted in P Kropotkin, The Great, p387.
42 According to P Kropotkin, The Great, p387.
43 A Soboul, French Revolution, p339.
44 For details, see A Soboul, French Revolution, p342.
45 A Soboul, French Revolution, p386.
46 Quoted in H G Schenk, ‘Revolutionary Influences and Conservatism in
Literature and Thought’, in C W Crawley (ed), Cambridge New Modern
History, vol IX (Cambridge, 1965), p91.
47 See his Class Struggle in the First French Republic (London, 1977).
48 G W F Hegel, The Philosophy of History (New York, 1956), p447.
49 Quoted in H G Schenk, ‘Revolutionary Influences’, p100.
50 G Williams, Artisans and Sans-culottes (London, 1981), p58.
51 G Williams, Artisans, pp59, 62-66. ‘Planting the Liberty Tree’, in E P
Thompson’s classic The Making of the English Working Class, ch 5 (New
York, 1966), contains a comprehensive account of all these developments.
52 According to G Williams, Artisans, p78.
53 For a full account see E P Thompson’s The Making, pp73-74.
54 See the account in J D Mackie, A History of Scotland (Harmondsworth,
1973), pp311-313.
55 T Moore, The Life and Death of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, vol 1 (London,
1831), p204.
56 According to F Campbell, The Dissenting Voice, Protestant Democracy in
Ulster (Belfast, 1991), p51.
57 F Campbell, The Dissenting Voice, p98.
58 The figure is given in T Gray, The Orange Order (London, 1972), p69. T
Packenham gives the number killed in the rebellion as between 30,000 and
70,000—see The Year of Liberty (London, 1978), p392.
59 F Campbell, The Dissenting Voice, p83.
60 C Fitzgibbon, quoted in T Gray, The Orange Order, p68.
61 Quoted in H G Schenk, ‘Revolutionary Influences’, p100.
62 Quoted in H G Schenk, ‘Revolutionary Influences’, p98.
63 Quoted in J Keane, Tom Paine, p323.
64 Quoted in H G Schenk, ‘Revolutionary Influences’, p106.
65 Quoted in H G Schenk, ‘Revolutionary Influences’, p105.
66 E Gibbon, Autobiography, quoted in P Gray, Voltaire’s Politics (New
Jersey, 1959), p259.
67 Both Coleridge and Hölderlin are quoted in H G Schenk, ‘Revolutionary
Influences’, p100.
68 See A Desmond and J Moore, Darwin (London, 1992).
69 Quoted in R M Hartwell, ‘Economic Change in England and Europe 1780-
1830’, in Cambridge New Modern History, vol IX, p42.
70 Such facts suggest that the pre-Columbian civilisations of the Americas may
not have been as irrational or as impeded by their failure to use the wheel,
since nature did not provide them with potentially domesticable draft
animals to pull wheeled vehicles.
71 The first railway ran from Stockport to Darlington and opened in 1825, but
most of its motive power came from stationary engines, not locomotives.
See P Mathias, The First Industrial Nation (London, 1983), p255.
72 Figures from E Hobsbawm, Industry and Empire (Harmondsworth, 1971),
p86.
73 For a full account of this transformation in attitudes to time, see E P
Thompson, ‘Time, Work and Industrial Capitalism’, in Customs in Common
(London, 1992), pp352-403.
74 Evidence to Poor Law Report of 1832, quoted in D McNally, Against the
Market (London, 1993), p101.
75 J Thelwall, The Rights of Nature (London, 1796), pp21, 24, quoted in E P
Thompson, Making, p185.
76 See, for instance, D Williams, John Frost, a Study in Chartism (New York,
1969).
77 See M Jenkins, The General Strike of 1842 (London, 1980); for a
contemporary account, see The Trial of Fergus O’Connor and Fifty Eight
Others (Manchester, 1843, reprinted New York 1970).
78 For a full account, see J Saville, 1848 (Cambridge, 1987).
79 Quoted in Cambridge New Modern History, vol IX, p59.
80 According to G Mayer, Frederick Engels (London, 1936), p44.
81 For Engels’ interest in and admiration for Owen, see G Mayer, Frederick
Engels, p45. For his view of the influence of political economy, The
Condition of the English Working Class, translated in K Marx and F
Engels, Collected Works, vol 4 (London, 1975), p527, and for his first
critique of it, a year after arriving in Manchester, see his ‘Outlines of a
Critique of Political Economy’, in K Marx and F Engels, Collected Works,
vol 3 (London, 1975), p418.
82 Published today in various editions as the Paris Manuscripts, The 1844
Manuscripts or sometimes simply as The Early Writings.
83 All the quotes are from K Marx, 1844 Manuscripts, in K Marx and F
Engels, Collected Works, vol 3.
84 This Marx does in the three volumes of Capital. For more in-depth
accounts of his ideas, see my book The Economics of the Madhouse
(London, 1995), the first chapter of my Explaining the Crisis, a Marxist
Reappraisal (London, 1999) and A Callinicos’s The Revolutionary Ideas
of Karl Marx (London, 1999).
85 Most English translations use the word ‘man’ here and follow it up with the
pronoun ‘he’. But Marx in fact uses the German word ‘Menschen’ (humans)
not ‘Mann’ (man).
86 Quoted in R Price (ed), Documents on the French Revolution of 1848
(London, 1996), p46-47.
87 D Blackbourn, The Fontana History of Germany, 1780-1918 (London,
1997), p147.
88 R Price (ed), Documents, p9. For the German Rhineland, see J Sperber,
Rhineland Radicals (New Jersey, 1993), pp54-59.
89 R Price (ed), Documents, p11.
90 C Pouthas, ‘The Revolutions of 1848’, in Cambridge New Modern History,
vol X, p393.
91 C Pouthas, ‘The Revolutions of 1848’, p394.
92 R Price (ed), Documents, p17.
93 These are the figure given by Frederick Engels writing at the time in Neue
Rheinische Zeitung, 2 July 1848, translated in K Marx and F Engels,
Collected Works, vol 7 (London, 1977), p161.
94 Flaubert’s novel Sentimental Education includes a sympathetic account of
their attitudes, as well as caricatures of the meetings of the revolutionary
clubs.
95 R Price (ed), Documents.
96 F Engels, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 27 June 1848, translated in K Marx
and F Engels, Collected Works, vol 7 (London, 1977), p131.
97 Quoted in R Price (ed), Documents, p20.
98 Quoted in F Mehring, Absolutism and Revolution in Germany, 1525-1848
(London, 1975), p214.
99 Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 31 December 1848, translated in Collected
Works, vol 7.
100 All the figures here come from D Blackbourn, Fontana History of
Germany, p180.
101 It is this revolt which features in the film The Leopard.
102 The words used by the prince in the film The Leopard.
103 Speech in debate with Douglass, quoted in J M McPherson, The Struggle
for Equality (New Jersey, 1992), p11.
104 See for instance his speech of 4 July 1861, quoted in J M McPherson,
Battle Cry of Freedom (London, 1988), p312.
105 Quoted in J M McPherson, Battle Cry, p46.
106 Marx noted this at the time. See his article for the paper Die Presse of 7
November 1861, translated in K Marx and F Engels, Collected Works, vol
19 (London, 1984), p50.
107 J M McPherson, The Struggle for Equality, p47.
108 Quoted in J M McPherson, The Struggle for Equality, p47.
109 J M McPherson, The Struggle for Equality, p51.
110 J M McPherson, The Struggle for Equality, p82.
111 J M McPherson, The Struggle for Equality, pp128-129
112 Even Frederick Engels could write to Marx (30 July 1862) that he
expected the North to get a ‘thrashing’ and expressed doubts about the
North’s ability to ‘suppress the rebellion’ (9 September 1862). Marx by
contrast was ‘prepared to bet my life…these fellows [the South] will come
off worst…You allow yourself to be influenced by the military aspect of
things a little too much’ (10 September 1862). K Marx and F Engels,
Collected Works, vol 41 (Moscow, 1985), pp414-416.
113 Marx quotes the speech at length in his article for Die Presse of 22 August
1862, in K Marx and F Engels, Collected Works, vol 19, p234-235. Parts
are also quoted in J M McPherson, The Struggle for Equality, p113.
114 K Marx, article in Die Presse, 12 October 1862, translated in K Marx and
F Engels, Collected Works, vol 19, p250.
115 See, for instance, his satirical novels Zadig and The Princess of Babylon.
116 A Smith, The Wealth of Nations (London, 1986), pp174-175.
117 ‘Niggers’ is the common expression for the ‘natives’ used by the characters
in Kipling’s short stories. ‘Wogs’ was a convenient catch-all insult for
anyone unlucky enough to be colonised by the British Empire.
118 B Stein, A History of India (Oxford, 1998), p202, even goes so far as to
speak of ‘the development of an indigenous capitalist class in India well
before the onset of formal colonisation’. I am not knowledgeable enough to
judge whether the characterisation is correct. I suspect, however, that what
is being described is merchant and finance capital, such as that which
characterised Europe from the middle of the feudal period onwards, rather
than industrial or agrarian capitalism, except in the most embryonic of
forms. Some historians also argue that the religious and peasant revolts
could have opened the way for full capitalist development; others deny it
vehemently. Again, I am in no position to make a judgement.
119 K Marx, ‘The Revolt in the Indian Army’, New York Daily Tribune, 15
July 1857, contained in K Marx and F Engels, Collected Works, vol 15
(Moscow, 1986), p297.
120 According to B Stein, A History, p248.
121 Figures for the early years of direct imperial rule and for the years after
the 1890 s are given in B Stein, A History, pp257, 263.
122 These are the figures given by B Stein, A History, p262.
123 A ‘Censor’, ‘Memorial to the Emperor’, translated in F Schurmann and O
Scholl, Imperial China (Harmondsworth, 1977), p139.
124 These are the explanations both of the editors and of Tsiang Ting-fu in F
Schurmann and O Scholl, Imperial China, pp126, 133, 139.
125 This is the argument put very strongly by J Gernet, A History of Chinese
Civilisation (Cambridge, 1996), pp539-541.
126 W Franke, ‘The T’ai-p’ing Rebellion’, extract in F Schurmann and O
Scholl, Imperial China, pp170-183.
127 The figure is given in P A Kuhn, ‘The T’ai-p’ing Rebellion’, in J R
Fairbank (ed), Cambridge History of China, vol 10 (Cambridge, 1978),
p309.
128 J Batou, ‘Muhammed Ali’s Egypt, 1805-48’, in J Batou (ed), Between
Development and Underdevelopment (Geneva, 1991), p183-207. Some
economic historians (for instance, D Landes in The Wealth and Poverty of
Nations (London, 1998)) challenge this picture of advance. They point to
inefficiencies, high real cost and the low quality of output. But similar
points can be made about early industrialisation in other countries, like
Japan in the 1880 s, that later experienced international competitive
success. One big difference between them and Egypt was that they were
more insulated from direct foreign competition and were more easily able to
evade direct western dictation of their trade policies.
129 Quoted in J Batou, ‘Muhammed Ali’s Egypt’, p205.
130 M Hane, Modern Japan (Boulder, 1992), p52-53.
131 M Hane, Modern Japan, p71.
132 T Gautier, quoted in A Horne, The Fall of Paris (London, 1968), p26.
133 A Horne, The Fall of Paris, p53.
134 See, for instance, the list of prices given by A Horne, The Fall of Paris,
p254.
135 Quoted in A Horne, The Fall of Paris, p328.
136 P O Lissagaray, History of the Paris Commune, translated by E Marx
(London, 1976), p65.
137 P O Lissagaray, History of the Paris Commune, p65.
138 K Marx, ‘The Civil War in France’, in K Marx and F Engels, Collected
Works, vol 22 (London, 1986), pp333-334.
139 K Marx, ‘The Civil War in France’, p339.
140 Quoted in A Horne, The Fall of Paris, p551.
141 The Times, 29 May and 1 June 1871, quoted in A Horne, The Fall of
Paris, p555.
142 A Horne, The Fall of Paris, p556.
143 Louise Michel’s trial is described in many places. See, for instance, P O
Lissagaray, History of the Paris Commune, pp343-344.
144 A Horne, The Fall of Paris, p363.
145 K Marx, letter to Kugelmann of 12 April 1871, in K Marx and F Engels,
On the Paris Commune (Moscow, 1976), p284.
146 K Marx, letter to Kugelmann of 17 April 1871, in K Marx and F Engels,
On the Paris Commune, p285.
Part seven: The century of hope and horror
1 Figures given in G Stedman Jones, Outcast London ( Harmondsworth,
1976), p132.
2 See tables 13 and 3, in E Hobsbawm, Industry and Empire
(Harmondsworth, 1971).
3 OECD figures.
4 G B Longstaff in September 1893, quoted in G Stedman Jones, Outcast,
p128.
5 Quoted in G Stedman Jones, Outcast, p129.
6 Charity Organising Society report of 1870-71, quoted in G Stedman Jones,
Outcast, p266.
7 In practice, Maxwell used mathematical approaches that contradicted this
model and laid the ground for some of the very different models that were to
prevail in the 20 th century. But it was his original model that was to
dominate much scientific thinking for a generation. See W Berkson, Fields
of Force (London, 1974), chs 5, 6 and 7, especially pp150-155.
8 As with Maxwell’s model of the universe, there were elements in Freud’s
theory which were subject to a very different approach. By the 1920 s
psychoanalysis was often seen as justifying irrationalist challenges to the
mechanical-determinist approach. But Freud’s own starting point was
certainly based on mechanical determinism. See, for instance, the accounts
of his early surgical attempts to deal with hysterical symptoms in J Masson,
The Assault on Truth (Harmondsworth, 1984), pp55-106.
9 Quoted in R Miliband, Capitalist Democracy in Britain (Oxford, 1982), fn
2, p22.
10 See R Harrison, Before the Socialists (London, 1965), pp69-78.
11 M Cowling, 1867, Disraeli, Gladstone and Revolution, quoted in R
Miliband, Capitalist Democracy, p25.
12 K Marx, second draft for The Civil War in France, translated in K Marx
and F Engels, Collected Works, vol 22 (London, 1985).
13 M Cowling, Disraeli, p49.
14 R Miliband, Capitalist Democracy, p28.
15 Hanham, quoted in R Miliband, Capitalist Democracy, p27.
16 R T McKenzie, British Political Parties (London, 1963), p15.
17 On this, see G Stedman Jones, Outcast, pp344, 348.
18 Britain, as the oldest industrial capitalism, also had one of the oldest
nationalisms from above. E P Thompson showed how the government
sponsored popular nationalist organisations to counter British Jacobinism in
the 1790 s. See E P Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class
(New York, 1966). More recently Linda Colley has emphasised the scale of
developing national feeling from the mid-1750 s onwards. See L Colley,
Britons (London, 1994). Unfortunately, her approach is one dimensional and
fails to see what Thompson did note, the counter-currents to nationalism that
always existed.
19 E Bernstein, Evolutionary Socialism (London, 1909), pxi.
20 E Bernstein, Evolutionary Socialism, p159.
21 E Bernstein, Evolutionary Socialism, p160.
22 R Luxemburg, Social Reform or Social Revolution (Colombo, 1966).
23 B Vandervort, Wars of Imperial Conquest in Africa 1830-1914 (London,
1998), p27.
24 Nicola Labanca, quoted in B Vandervort, Wars of Imperial Conquest,
p164.
25 B Vandervort, Wars of Imperial Conquest, p177. See also T Packenham,
The Scramble for Africa (London, 1992), pp539-548.
26 T Packenham, The Scramble, p546.
27 T Packenham, The Scramble, p652.
28 T Packenham, The Scramble, p600. On Leopold’s philanthropic, anti-
slavery claims, see pp11-23.
29 Quoted in T Packenham, The Scramble, p22.
30 Figures from H Feis, Europe: The World’s Banker, 1879-1914, quoted in M
Kidron, ‘Imperialism, the Highest Stage but One’, in International
Socialism 9 (first series), p18.
31 For a longer discussion of the economics of imperialism, see my book
Explaining the Crisis (London, 1999), pp35-36—and, for a reply to
counter-arguments on the empirical data, fn 50, p159.
32 Details from L Derfler, Paul Lafargue and the Flowering of French
Socialism (Harvard, 1998), pp48 and 90.
33 See L Trotsky, Results and Prospects, in The Permanent Revolution and
Results and Prospects (London, 1962). For his general account of this
revolution, see L Trotsky, 1905 (New York, 1972).
34 Full title: The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions
(London, 1986).
35 According to A Sayers, ‘The Failure of Italian Socialism’, International
Socialism 37 (first series).
36 R Luxemburg, writing in the spring of 1915, in The Junius Pamphlet
(London, 1967), p1.
37 L Trotsky, My Life (New York, 1960) pp233-234.
38 J Canning (ed), Living History: 1914 (London, 1967), p240.
39 V Serge, Memoirs of a Revolutionary (London, 1963), p47.
40 Quoted in L Trotsky, My Life, p233.
41 D Blackbourne, The Fontana History of Germany 1780-1918 (London,
1977), pp461-462.
42 A Shlyapnikov, On the Eve of 1917 (London, 1982), p18.
43 R Fox, Smoky Crusade (London, 1938), p192.
44 L Trotsky, My Life, pp233-4.
45 These are quoted in J Joll, Europe Since 1870 (London, 1983), p194.
46 Keir Hardie, quoted in R Miliband, Parliamentary Socialism (London,
1975), p44. For an account of Kautsky’s position, see M Salvadori, Karl
Kautsky and the Socialist Revolution 1880-1938 (London, 1979), pp183-
185.
47 According to D Blackbourne, The Fontana History of Germany, p475.
48 Quoted in D MacIntyre, The Great War, Causes and Consequences
(Glasgow, 1979), p63.
49 D MacIntyre, The Great War, p64.
50 D Blackbourne, The Fontana History of Germany, pp488-489.
51 For details, see D Blackbourne, The Fontana History of Germany, pp480,
482.
52 Figures given in J Kocka, Facing Total War (London, 1984), p23.
53 J Kocka, Facing Total War, p17.
54 D MacIntyre, The Great War, p61.
55 Quoted in W Allison and J Fairley, The Monocled Mutineer (London,
1986), p68.
56 For an account of this at Christmas 1916, see extracts from the diary of
Lieutenant William St Leger, in M Moynihan (ed), People at War 1914-
1918 (London, 1988), p52.
57 There is a full account, based on interviews with participants, in W Allison
and J Fairley, The Monocled Mutineer, pp81-111
58 Translated in V I Lenin, Collected Works, vol 23 (Moscow, 1964), p253.
59 Known as St Petersburg before August 1914.
60 The date is according to the Julian calendar still used in Russia at the time.
According to the reformed Gregorian calendar used in the West it was in
March.
61 According to the testimony of Kayurov, mentioned in L Trotsky, The History
of the Russian Revolution (London, 1965), p121.
62 S A Smith, ‘Petrograd in 1917: the View from Below’, in D H Kaiser (ed),
The Workers’ Revolution in Russia of 1917 (Cambridge, 1987), p61.
63 Quoted in L Trotsky, The History, p181.
64 N N Sukhanov, The Russian Revolution 1917 (Princeton, 1984), p77.
65 N Stone, The Eastern Front (London, 1975), p218.
66 N Stone, The Eastern Front, pp283-284, 291.
67 Figures and further details given in S A Smith, Red Petrograd (Cambridge,
1983), pp10-12.
68 The Bolsheviks took six seats, the Mensheviks seven, but the Menshevik
seats were in more middle class constituencies. See T Cliff, Lenin, Volume
1: Building the Party (London, 1975), p325.
69 In this paragraph I am summarising a long history of activities and
theoretical debates. For a full account see T Cliff, Lenin, Volume 1. I
Getzler, Martov (Melbourne, 1967), provides a sympathetic account of the
leading Menshevik.
70 Figures given in T Cliff, Lenin, Volume 2: All Power to the Soviets
(London, 1976), pp148, 150.
71 Figures quoted with sources in M Haynes, ‘Was there a Parliamentary
Alternative in 1917?’ in International Socialism 76, p46.
72 Both sets of figures given, with sources, in M Haynes, ‘Was there a
Parliamentary Alternative in 1917?’
73 For an account of some of these struggles, see S A Smith, Red Petrograd; T
Cliff, Lenin, Volume 2, pp168-189.
74 Quoted in N N Sukhanov, The Russian Revolution, p627-628.
75 Quoted in N N Sukhanov, The Russian Revolution, p629.
76 Figures given with sources in S A Smith, Red Petrograd, p87.
77 V I Lenin, Collected Works, vol 8 (Moscow, 1962), pp28-29.
78 V I Lenin, Collected Works, vol 27 (Moscow, 1977), p98.
79 For an account of this ‘insurrection’, see J M Cammett, Antonio Gramsci
and the Origins of Italian Communism (Stanford, 1967), pp52-53.
80 Quoted in P Nettl, Rosa Luxemburg, vol II (London, 1966), p689.
81 S A Smith, Red Petrograd, p243.
82 For details, see V Serge, Year One of the Russian Revolution (London,
1992), pp282.
83 V Serge, Year One, p245.
84 V Serge, Year One, p265.
85 F A Upton, The Finnish Revolution, 1917-18 (Minnesota, 1980), p522,
quoted in J Rees, ‘In Defence of October’, International Socialism 52, p33.
86 According to J Joll, Europe Since 1870 (London, 1990), p237.
87 For this, and further details of the revolution in German-speaking Austria,
see F L Carsten, Revolution in Central Europe 1918-19 (London, 1972),
pp22-32.
88 For further details and sources on this, and other aspects of the German
revolution, see my book The Lost Revolution, Germany 1918-1923
(London, 1982).
89 According to Rosa Leviné-Meyer, who was in a Berlin hospital at the time.
See her Leviné (London, 1973), p80.
90 E Hobsbawm, The Age of Extremes (London, 1994), p68.
91 Quoted in E H Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, vol 3 (Harmondsworth,
1966), pp135-136.
92 Quoted in E H Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, vol 3, p135.
93 Details in E H Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, vol 3, p134.
94 Quoted in E Wigham, Strikes and the Governmemt 1893-1981 (London,
1982), p53.
95 G H Meaker, The Revolutionary Left in Spain 1914-1923 (Stanford, 1974),
p134.
96 Quoted in G H Meaker, The Revolutionary Left, p141.
97 G H Meaker, The Revolutionary Left, p142.
98 G H Meaker, The Revolutionary Left, p143.
99 For accounts of this strike, see G H Meaker, The Revolutionary Left,
pp158-161 and 165-168, and G Brennan, The Spanish Labyrinth
(Cambridge, 1974), pp70-71. Meaker sees the outcome of the strike as a
defeat for the workers, Brennan as ‘inconclusive’. P Pages, by contrast,
describes it as ‘a favourable outcome’ for the workers. See his Andreu Nin,
Su Evolución Política (Madrid, 1975).
100 I Turner, Industrial Labour and Politics (London, 1965), p194.
101 The whole story is brilliantly told in Erhard Lucas, Märzrevolution 1920
(Frankfurt, 1974). For a precis of events, see my The Lost Revolution, ch 9.
102 P Spriano, The Occupation of the Factories, Italy 1920 (London, 1975),
p60.
103 P Spriano, The Occupation of the Factories, pp21-22.
104 Quoted in P Spriano, The Occupation of the Factories, p56.
105 The full text of his speech is given in R Leviné-Meyer, Leviné.
106 Letter to Jacques Mesnil of April 1921, quoted in P Spriano, The
Occupation of the Factories, p132.
107 Quoted in P Spriano, The Occupation of the Factories, pp129-130.
108 A Rossi (pseudonym for Tasca), The Rise of Italian Fascism (London,
1938), p68.
109 A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, p74.
110 For a discussion of how real the revolutionary situation was in 1923, see
my The Lost Revolution, ch 13.
111 According to A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, pp82, 99.
112 A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, p126-127.
113 A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, p103.
114 Figures given by A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, p126-127.
115 A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, p148.
116 Quoted in A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, p145.
117 A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, p147.
118 A Rossi, The Rise of Italian Fascism, pp229-231.
119 G Carocci, Italian Fascism (Harmondsworth, 1975), p27.
120 G Carocci, Italian Fascism, p32.
121 See A D Harvey, Collision of Empire (Phoenix, 1994), p511.
122 The best account of these events is to be found in P Avrich, Kronstadt
1921 (New Jersey, 1991).
123 Lenin, Collected Works, vol 32 (Moscow, 1965), p24.
124 Quoted in M Schachtman, The Struggle for the New Course (New York,
1943), p150.
125 Lenin to the 11 th Congress of the RCP(B) in V I Lenin, Collected Works,
vol 33 (Moscow, 1976), p288.
126 See, for example, the diaries of Tom Jones, who was secretary to the
cabinet, in T Jones, Whitehall Diaries, vol III, Ireland 1918-25 (London,
1971).
127 The 1921 figures, extracted from official statistics in R Palme Dutt, Guide
to the Problem of India (London, 1942), p59.
128 J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement 1919-27 (Stanford, 1968),
p42.
129 J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement, p47.
130 See B Stein, A History of India (London, 1998), p297.
131 This description is from R Palme Dutt, Guide, p112; similar descriptions
are to be found in B Stein, A History, p304, and M J Akbar, Nehru (London,
1989), pp116-118.
132 India in 1919, quoted in R Palme Dutt, Guide, p113.
133 For different accounts of this incident, see B Stein, A History, p309, and
M J Akbar, Nehru, pp152-152.
134 Quoted in M J Akbar, Nehru, p154.
135 Hu Shih, extract from ‘The Chinese Renaissance’, translated in F
Shurmann and O Schell, Republican China (Harmondsworth, 1977), p55.
136 Figures given in J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement, p11.
137 J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement, p156.
138 J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement, p293.
139 J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement, p325.
140 For details, see J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement, pp356-361;
and H Isaacs, The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution (Stanford, 1961),
pp130-142. The rising also features as the backdrop to André Malraux’s
novel, Man’s Fate just as the Hong Kong strike is the backcloth to his Les
Conquerants.
141 For accounts of his coup, see J Chesneaux, The Chinese Labor Movement,
pp311-313; and H Isaacs, Tragedy, pp89-110.
142 André Malraux’s Man’s Fate is set against the background of these events;
the main figure ends up waiting to be thrown into a furnace by Chiang Kai
Shek’s forces.
143 See the accounts of the period in R E Ruiz, The Great Rebellion: Mexico
1905-24 (New York, 1982), pp120-122, and A Gilly, The Mexican
Revolution (London, 1983), pp28-45.
144 R E Ruiz, The Great Rebellion, p58.
145 According to A Gilly, The Mexican Revolution, p37; for figures which
suggest a similar picture, see R E Ruiz, The Great Rebellion, pp59, 63.
146 See L Trotsky, The Third International After Lenin (New York, 1957),
and Permanent Revolution (London, 1962).
147 Quoted in F Sternberg, The Coming Crisis (London, 1947).
148 Quoted in J K Galbraith, The Great Crash (London, 1992), p95.
149 See the introduction to F Dobbs, Teamster Rebellion (New York, 1986).
150 Quoted in J K Galbraith, The Great Crash, pp77-78.
151 Quoted in J Braunthal, In Search of the Millennium (London, 1945),
p270. See also André Guerin’s description of union leaders embracing the
US model in France in the late 1920 s, in A Guerin, Front Populaire,
Révolution Manquée, (Paris, 1997), pp79-80. Such expressions of
optimism contrast with Eric Hobsbawm’s claim that everyone could see the
crisis had not gone away in the mid-to late 1920 s. See E Hobsbawm, The
Age of Extremes (London, 1994), p91.
152 Quoted by F Sternberg, The Coming Crisis.
153 See P Gay, The Dilemma of Democratic Socialism (New York, 1979).
154 George Hicks to 1927 TUC conference, quoted in R Miliband,
Parliamentary Socialism, p149.
155 See the account of Stalin and Bukharin’s 1925 arguments in R B Day, The
‘Crisis’ and the ‘Crash’ (London, 1981), pp80-81.
156 For a resumé of Bukharin’s 1928 arguments, see R B Day, The ‘Crisis’
and the ‘Crash’, pp156-159. By this time Stalin had done another
somersault and was claiming that the imminent breakdown of capitalism
meant immediate insurrectionary possibilities for Western Communists—a
view that was just as mistaken as Bukharin’s.
157 In his Civilisation and its Discontents of the 1920 s, Freud seems to
accept that the very notion of civilisation is incompatible with humans
coming to terms with their instincts in a rational way.
158 See, for instance, G Lukács, The Historical Novel (London, 1962) and
Studies in European Realism (New York, 1964). Lukács sees the ‘realist’
novel before 1848 giving way on the one hand to mechanical naturalism,
and on the other to subjectivist psychologism. This leads him to reject most
20 th century literature out of hand. You can, however, accept his central
insight without drawing this conclusion.
159 See C P Kindelberger, The World in Depression (London, 1973), pp116-
117, 124; see also L Corey, The Decline of American Capitalism (London,
1938), p184.
160 Figures in E H Carr, The Interregnum (London, 1984), p39.
161 Quoted in M Lewin, Lenin’s Last Struggle (London, 1969), p12.
162 And even Trotsky did not challenge the decision immediately.
163 The quotations here are given in J G Wright’s translation of L Trotsky, The
Third International After Lenin (New York, 1957), p36. An English
translation of this edition of Stalin’s work is to be found in the British
Library.
164 There are accounts of these protests in V Serge, Memoirs of a
Revolutionary, and M Reiman, The Birth of Stalinism: the USSR on the
Eve of the ‘Second Revolution’ (London, 1987). I also once heard the late
Harry Wicks describe his personal experience of them as a student at a
Comintern training school in Russia.
165 M Reiman, The Birth of Stalinism, p2.
166 M Reiman, The Birth of Stalinism, p12.
167 E H Carr and R W Davies, Foundations of a Planned Economy, vol 1
(London, 1969), p313.
168 Quoted in I Deutscher, Stalin (London, 1961), p328.
169 Figures given with sources in T Cliff, Russia: A Marxist Analysis
(London, 1964), p33.
170 Figures, with sources, given in T Cliff, State Capitalism in Russia
(London, 1988), p53.
171 Figures, with sources, given in T Cliff, State Capitalism, p42.
172 These figures are from R W Davies, ‘Forced Labour Under Stalin: The
Archive Revelations’, in New Left Review 214 (November-December
1995).
173 Figure calculated, with sources, in T Cliff, State Capitalism, p130.
174 Speech of Stalin in Moscow, 5 April 1927, quoted in H Isaacs, Tragedy,
p162.
175 Figures given, with source, in P Frank, Histoire de l’Internationale
Communiste (Paris, 1979), p634.
176 Figures given in E Rosenhaft, Beating the Fascists, the German
Communists and Political Violence, 1929-33 (Cambridge, 1983), pp44-45.
177 According to a party official cited in E Rosenhaft, Beating the Fascists,
p45.
178 Figures from Rote Fahne, 2 February 1932, quoted in L Trotsky, Fascism,
Stalinism and the United Front, 1930-34 (London, 1969), p39.
179 W S Allen, The Nazi Seizure of Power: The Experience of a Single
German Town, 1930-35 (Chicago, 1965), p292.
180 A full breakdown of Nazi membership figures by class and age is to be
found in J Noakes and G Pridham, Nazism 1919-45, Volume 1, The Rise to
Power 1919-34 (Exeter, 1983), pp84-87.
181 See, for instance, M H Kele, Nazis and Workers (North Carolina, 1972),
p210. Mühlberger, who tries to deny the Nazis had a middle class base,
admits that its appeal to workers was mainly among rival workers and the
unemployed. See D Mühlberger, Hitler’s Followers (London, 1991), pp165,
177, 205.
182 M Mann, ‘As the Twentieth Century Ages’, New Left Review 214,
November-December 1995, p110.
183 K Kautsky, ‘Force and Democracy’, translated in D Beetham, Marxists in
the Face of Fascism (Manchester, 1983), p248.
184 R Hilferding, ‘Between the Decisions’, translated in D Beetham,
Marxists, p261.
185 W S Allen, The Nazi Seizure of Power, p142.
186 A Schweitzer, Big Business in the Third Reich (Bloomington, 1963),
p107.
187 J Noakes and G Pridham, Nazism, p94.
188 As is admitted by H A Turner, who is generally sceptical about claims that
Hitler owed his rise to power to business support, in H A Turner, German
Business and the Rise of Hitler (New York, 1985), p243.
189 A Schweitzer, Big Business, p95.
190 See A Schweitzer, Big Business, pp96-97, 100. Turner claims the major
Ruhr industrialists were colder towards Hitler than journalistic accounts
claim. But he does admit that Hitler addressed influential business
audiences. See H A Turner, German Business, p172.
191 Quoted in F L Carsten, Britain and the Weimar Republic (London, 1984),
pp270-271.
192 Even Turner cannot fault this account of the sequence of events. For further
sources, see I Kershaw (ed), Why Did Weimar Fail? (London, 1990), and P
D Stachura, The Nazi Machtergreifung (London, 1983). For an overview of
all the arguments from a Marxist point of view, see D Gluckstein’s excellent
The Nazis, Capitalism and the Working Class (London, 1999), ch 3.
193 J Braunthal, History of the International, vol II (London, 1966), p380.
193a Vorwärts evening edition, 30 January 1933, quoted, for instance, in E B
Wheaton, The Nazi Revolution 1933-85 (New York, 1969), p223.
194 E Rosenhaft, Beating the Fascists, provides an excellent account of this.
195 See A Merson, Communist Resistance in Nazi Germany (London, 1986),
p29.
196 Quoted in J Braunthal, History of the International, p383.
197 A Merson, Communist Resistance, p61.
198 A Sturmthal, The Tragedy of European Labour 1918-39 (London, 1944),
p51.
199 A Sturmthal, The Tragedy of European Labour, p172.
200 Speech quoted by J Braunthal, a leading social democratic activist in
Vienna at the time, in J Braunthal, In Search of the Millennium, (London,
1945) p280.
201 J Braunthal, In Search of the Millennium, p280.
202 Quoted in A Sturmthal, The Tragedy of European Labour, p176.
203 A Sturmthal, The Tragedy of European Labour, p177.
204 J Jackson, The Popular Front in France, Defending Democracy 1934-38
(Cambridge, 1990), p28.
205 J Jackson, The Popular Front in France, p28.
206 J Jackson, The Popular Front in France, pp5-6.
207 The figures and the quote are from J Jackson, The Popular Front in
France, p88.
208 Quoted in J Jackson, The Popular Front in France, pp10, 88.
209 According to J Damos and M Gibelin, June ’36 (London, 1986), p229.
210 According to J Jackson, The Popular Front in France, p112.
211 J Jackson, The Popular Front in France, p13.
212 Figures given in J Jackson, The Popular Front in France, pp219-220. See
also J Danos and M Gibelin, June ’36, p214.
213 For figures on numbers sacked and locked out, see J Danos and M
Gibelin, June ’36, p230.
214 G Orwell, Homage to Catalonia, (London, 1938).
215 Quoted in P Broué and E Témime, The Revolution and the War in Spain
(London, 1972), p82.
216 Description of the 1 May demonstration in P Broué and E Témime, The
Revolution, p81.
217 Figures from a speech by Robles, given in P Broué and E Témime, The
Revolution, p84.
218 See the accounts of what happened in the major towns in P Broué and E
Témime, The Revolution, pp102-118.
219 P Broué and E Témime, The Revolution, p121.
220 The report of the meeting, by the anarchist leader Santillan, is translated in
P Broué and E Témime, The Revolution, p130.
221 Report of his speech to a CNT gathering soon afterwards, in R Fraser,
Blood of Spain (Harmondsworth, 1981), p112. For an account sympathetic
to the anarcho-syndicalists see J B Acarete, Durutti (Barcelona, 1975),
pp176-179.
222 See the account of the war in the north in P Broué and E Témime, The
Revolution, pp389-414.
223 This argument was used, for instance, by the German philosopher
Heidegger to excuse his membership of the Nazi Party: ‘To the severe and
justified reproaches over “a regime that has exterminated millions of Jews,
that has made terror a norm”…I can only add that instead of the “Jews” one
should put the “East Germans” (letter to Herbert Marcuse, 20 January
1948), in R Wolin, The Heidegger Controversy: A Critical Reader
(London, 1993), p163.
224 C K Kindelberger, The World in Depression, p233.
225 C K Kindelberger, The World in Depression, p272.
226 American Civil Liberties Union report quoted in A Preis, Labor’s Giant
Step (New York, 1982), p17.
227 A Preis, Labor’s Giant Step, p45.
228 A Preis, Labor’s Giant Step, p61.
229 See, for example, B J Widick, Detroit, City of Race and Class Violence
(Chicago, 1972), p74.
230 B J Widick, Detroit, p64.
231 A Preis, Labor’s Giant Step, p67.
232 A Preis, Labor’s Giant Step, p67.
233 Quoted in A Preis, Labor’s Giant Step, p70.
234 J T Farrell, Selected Essays (New York, 1964).
235 R Ellison, Invisible Man (Harmondsworth, 1965), p404.
236 A H Hansen, Economic Stabilisation (New York, 1971), p76.
237 For figures and details, see T Mason, Nazism, Fascism and the Working
Class (Cambridge, 1995), p114.
238 E Hobsbawm, The Age of Extremes, p144.
239 Quoted in J Anderson, The United States, Great Britain and the Cold
War, 1944-1947 (Missouri, 1981), p6.
240 A J P Taylor, The Second World War (Harmondsworth, 1976), p86.
241 Quote in J Anderson, The United States, p6.
242 G Kolko, Century of War (New York, 1994), p253.
243 Figures given in G Kolko, Century of War, p207.
244 This process of double-think is well described in Gunter Grass’s novel,
The Dog Years.
245 Quoted, for instance, in R Miliband, Parliamentary Socialism, p281.
246 According to figures in G Kolko, Century of War, p200.
247 P Ginsborg, A History of Contemporary Italy (London, 1990), p10.
248 P Ginsborg, A History, p67.
249 Quoted in G Kolko, Century of War, p294.
250 Quoted in G Kolko, The Politics of War (New York, 1970), pp114-115.
251 For a full account of these discussions see G Kolko, The Politics of War,
pp346-347.
252 Quoted in G Kolko, Century of War, p297.
253 For one account of his press conference, see G Kolko, Century of War,
p297.
254 See, for instance, G Kolko, Century of War, pp187-188.
255 See D Eudes, The Kapetanios (London, 1972), p172.
256 For a full description, see D Eudes, The Kapetanios, pp190-191.
257 See, for instance, G Kolko, Century of War, pp278-279, and The Politics
of War, pp185-192.
258 Description of the meeting at which he said this, in D Eudes, The
Kapetanios, p216.
259 Quoted in D Eudes, The Kapetanios, p229.
260 Quoted in G Kolko, Century of War, p375.
261 P Ginsborg, A History, p46; E Hobsbawm, The Age of Extremes, p168.
262 G Kolko, Century of War, p306.
263 A Horne, A Savage War of Peace: Algeria 1954-62 (Harmondsworth,
1979), p25.
264 China was (and is) the fifth permanent Security Council member. But its
seat was occupied by Chiang Kai Shek’s Kuomintang, even after it fled
mainland China to establish a US client regime in Taiwan. It was not until
the 1970 s that China proper was able to take the seat.
265 Report on contents of recently unearthed documents, in the Guardian, 2
October 1998.
266 Quoted in D Horowitz, From Yalta to Vietnam (Harmondsworth, 1967),
pp70, 73.
267 See I H Birchall, Workers Against the Monolith (London, 1974), p62, and
P Ginsborg, A History, pp110-112.
268 According to the Czechoslovak Communist Party journal, Nova Mysl, nos
6-7, 1968.
269 A Crosland, The Future for Socialism (London, 1956), p115.
270 A Crosland, The Future for Socialism, p115.
271 B Stein, A History, p327.
272 B Stein, A History, p336.
273 According to B Lapping, End of Empire (London, 1985), p356.
274 There are differing accounts of the mutiny in M J Akbar, Nehru, p369, and
B Stein, A History, p360.
275 See M J Akbar, Nehru, pp381-382.
276 Now Zambia, Zimbabwe and Malawi.
277 Quoted in B Lapping, Empire, p106.
278 Daily Telegraph, 28 September 1953, quoted in P Foot, The Politics of
Harold Wilson (Harmondsworth, 1968), p111.
279 M C Kaser, An Economic History of Eastern Europe (London, 1986), p9.
280 Quoted in M Haynes and P Binns, ‘Eastern European Class Societies’,
International Socialism 7 (Winter 1979).
281 M Jaenicker, Der Dritte Weg: Die Anti-Stalinistische Opposition gegen
Ulbricht seit 1953 (Cologne, 1964), p51.
282 For a full account of these events, see chapter 6 of my Class Struggles in
Eastern Europe (London, 1984).
283 P Fryer, Hungarian Tragedy (London, 1956), p46.
284 According to Hungarian official documents, summarised in G Litvan (ed),
The Hungarian Revolution of 1956 (London, 1996), p144.
285 For the most comprehensive collection, see B Lomax, Hungarian
Workers’ Councils of 1956 (New York, 1990). A much earlier collection,
including transcripts of radio broadcasts, is M J Lasky (ed), The Hungarian
Revolution (London, 1957). See also S Kopacsi, In the Name of the
Working Class (New York, 1986), and for a brief account of the dynamics
of the revolution, chapte 7 of my Class Struggles in Eastern Europe.
286 G Litvan (ed), The Hungarian Revolution, pp126-127.
287 According to J L Anderon, Che Guevara (New York, 1997), p216.
288 D Seers and others, Cuba: the Economic and Social Revolution (North
Carolina, 1964), p20.
289 E R May and P D Zelikow (eds), The Kennedy Tapes: Inside the White
House during the Cuban Missile Crisis (Harvard University Press, 1998).
290 Quoted in D Halberstam, The Best and the Brightest (London, 1970),
p78.
291 Figures given in J Deleyne, The Chinese Economy (London, 1973), p59.
292 See the manifesto ‘Whither China?’ of the Sheng-wu-lien, translated in
International Socialism 37 (first series).
293 According to J Deleyne, Chinese, p59.
294 D Bell, The End of Ideology (Illinois, 1960), p84.
295 H Marcuse, One Dimensional Man (London, 1964), ppxi-xii.
296 For the Cordobazo of May 1969, see R Falcon and B Galitelli, Argentina:
from Anarchism to Peronism (London, 1987), pp171-174.
297 For a fuller discussion of these issues, see the appendix to my Explaining
the Crisis.
298 I have given a bare summary here of much longer arguments. For a popular
presentation of these, see my book Economics of the Madhouse. For a more
technical accounts, see my Explaining the Crisis.
299 According to W Hutton, The State We’re In (London, 1994), p19.
300 For a full account of these events, see chapter 9 of my book, Class
Struggles in Eastern Europe.
301 Numerical breakdown of ‘adjusting’ economies given by R Sobhan,
‘Rethinking the Market Reform Paradigm’, Economic and Political Weekly
(Bombay), 25 July 1992.
302 Quoted in J Petras and M Morley, Latin America in the Time of Cholera
(New York, 1992), p14.
303 Food and Agricultural Organisation, The State of Food and Agriculture
1991.
303 a See, for example, figures in the Observer, 6 December 1998.
304 Moroslav Holub, quoted in the Guardian, 12 March 1999.
305 World Bank, World Development Report 1991, pp4-5.
306 S Brittan, Financial Times, 10 December 1992.
307 J M Stopford and S Strange, Rival States, Rival Firms (Cambridge,
1991), p1.
308 For a detailed account of the negotiations, see M Mohanty, ‘Strategies for
Solution of Debt Crisis: an Overview’, Economic and Political Weekly
(Bombay), 29 February 1992.
Conclusion
1 T Jackson and N Marks, Measuring Sustainable Economic Welfare: A Pilot
Index 1950-1990 (Stockholm Economic Institute, 1994).
2 The figure is given in J Schor, The Overworked American.
3 UN Human Development Report 1999 (Oxford, 1999).
4 R Luxemburg, ‘The Crisis of Social Democracy’, in R Luxemburg, Selected
Political Writings (London, 1972), pp195-196.
5 R Luxemburg, ‘The Crisis of Social Democracy’, p196.
6 Speech given in Moscow, July 1921, reported in Pravda, 12 July 1921,
quoted in P Broué, Trotsky (Paris, 1988), p349.
7 L Trotsky, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth
International (London, no date), p8.
8 Red Cross, 1999 World Disasters Report, summarised in the Guardian, 24
June 1999.
9 Quoted by Mark Almond, Independent on Sunday, 6 June 1999.
10 V I Lenin, ‘What Is To Be Done?’, in V I Lenin, Collected Works, vol 5
(Moscow, 1961), pp385-386.
11 V I Lenin, ‘What Is To Be Done?’, in Collected Works, vol 5, p422.
12 For a fuller discussion on this, see my article, ‘Party and Class’, reprinted
in T Cliff, D Hallas, C Harman and L Trotsky, Party and Class (London,
1996).
13 A Gramsci, The Modern Prince and Other Essays (London, 1957), p59.
Glossary
People
Abelard, Pierre: 13th century thinker condemned by church. Castrated after
secret love-affair with Héloise.
Alexander the Great: Macedonian ruler who established Greek Empire over
whole of Middle East from Indus to Nile.
Ali: Son-in-law of Mohammed, hero of ‘Shias’ opposed to what they saw as
‘degeneration’ of Islam from late 7th century onwards.
Allende, Salvador: Middle of road member of Chilean Socialist Party,
president of country 1970-73, overthrown by military coup which killed
thousands. Committed suicide after organising armed defence of presidential
palace.
Aquinas, Thomas: 13th century theologian, influenced by Aristotle’s writings.
His ideas laid basis for Catholic orthodoxy in centuries after.
Aristotle: Ancient Greek philosopher and scientist. Disciple of Plato but
developed very different philosophy dominant in Europe in late Middle Ages.
Ashoka (sometimes Asoka): Ruler of Mauryan Empire at its peak in 4th
century BC. Converted to Buddhism.
Augustine of Hippo: Christian bishop of around AD 400, writings influenced
mainstream Christian theology for next 1,000 years.
Augustus: First Roman emperor, 27 BC to AD 14.
Aurangzeb: Last Mogul emperor to exercise great power. Imprisoned his
father, Shah Jahan, in fort in Agra. Tried, unsuccessfully, to cement his rule by
imposing Islam upon imperial officials.
Averroes (ibn-Rushd): 12th century Arab philosopher in Moorish Spain,
commentaries on works of Aristotle very influential among 13th century
Christian scholars.
Bacon, Roger: 13th century scholar and scientist. Wrote down formula for
gunpowder for first time in Europe.
Beaverbrook, Lord: Max Aitken, Canadian-born British newspaper
millionaire, government minister in 1916 and 1940-42.
Bernstein, Eduard: Former collaborator with Engels, major supporter of
reformism within German socialism at end of 19th century. Opposed First
World War, but also revolution.
Bismarck, Otto von: Aristocrat, chancellor of Prussia and then of Germany
1862-90, responsible for wars which established German Empire as capitalist
state.
Blanc, Louis: French socialist leader of mid-19th century who believed in
method of reforms from existing state, played key role in Republican
government of February-June 1848.
Blanqui, August: French revolutionary who believed in dictatorship of
proletariat to be brought about by insurrectionary conspiracies—spent much of
life in prison.
Blum, Leon: Leader of French Socialist Party (SFIO), prime minister in
Popular Front governments 1936-37. Imprisoned in Germany in Second World
War.
Brecht, Bertolt: Foremost German playwright (and poet) of 20th century,
Communist from late 1920s onwards.
Brezhnev, Leonid: Ruler of USSR from 1964 to 1982, period characterised
by strengthening of central repression, but also by growing economic
stagnation.
Brissot, Jacques Pierre: Journalist, leader of Girondin Party during Great
French Revolution, executed October 1793.
Brüning, Heinrich: Leader of German Catholic Centre Party and chancellor
1930-32.
Brutus: Best known assassin of Julius Caesar.
Bukharin, Nicolai: Russian Bolshevik leader and theoretician. Allied with
Stalin in mid-1920s. Executed by Stalin 1937.
Burke, Edmund: Late 18th century Whig opponent of British colonialism in
America and oppression in Ireland who became leading Tory propagandist
against French Revolution.
Caballero, Largo: Leader of Spanish Socialist Party (PSOE), minister of
labour 1931-33, imprisoned after Asturias rising of 1934, prime minister
1936-37, forced to resign May 1937.
Caesar, Julius: Former supporter of Marius who conquered Gaul and then got
support of poor when he seized dictatorial power in 49 BC, assassinated 44
BC.
Calvin, Jean: French born leader of one wing of Reformation in mid-16th
century, preached doctrine that everything is ordained by god in advance,
effective ruler of Geneva.
Castro, Fidel: Landowner’s son who led guerrilla force in Cuba 1956-58,
when it took power on 31 December. Effective ruler of country since then.
Chaplin, Charlie: Most famous comic film actor in US, directed own films,
with left wing stance, like Modern Times and The Great Dictator. Banned
from entering US through late 1940s and 1950s.
Charles V: Ruler of Spain, Netherlands and Holy Roman Empire first half of
16th century
Chaucer, Geoffrey: 14th century London writer, one of first to use English.
Chiang Kai Shek: General and leader of Chinese nationalist Kuomintang after
1925. Ruler of China 1927-49 and of Taiwan in 1950s and 1960s.
Churchill, Winston: English politician of first half of 20th century. Enthusiast
for imperialism in Africa and India, minister in pre-war Liberal government,
wartime coalition government and Tory governments of 1920s. On right of Tory
party in 1930s, but believed Hitler threat to British Empire. Prime minister
during Second World War and again in early 1950s.
Clive, Robert: Official of East India Company responsible for Britain’s first
conquests in India in 1750s.
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor: English poet of late 18th and early 19th century,
friend of Wordsworth.
Collins, Michael: Military leader of Irish guerrilla forces fighting Britain after
First World War. Accepted treaty with Britain and partition in 1921. Killed
while leader of pro-treaty forces in 1922.
Connolly, James: Irish socialist born in Scotland 1870. Organiser for IWW in
US, then for Irish Transport and General Workers Union in Belfast. Led union
for first two years of world war, which he opposed. Formed workers’ Citizen
Army and played leading role in Easter Rising of 1916. Shot by British
government.
Constantine: Roman emperor of early 4th century AD who moved capital of
empire to Byzantium and made Christianity official religion.
Copernicus: Polish monk of first half of 16th century who set out first modern
European argument that earth moves round sun.
Cortés, Hernando: Led Spanish conquest of Mexico in early 1520s.
d’Holbach: French materialist philosopher of 18th century, associated with
Enlightenment.
Daladier, Éduard: Leader of French Radical Party, prime minister 1933,
1934, 1938-40.
Dante, Alighieri: Italian poet, born Florence 1265, one of first writers in
modern Italian.
Danton, Georges Jacques: Lawyer on radical wing of bourgeoisie in French
Revolution. Most revolutionary figure in Girondin government of 1792, then
joined with Robespierre to overthrow that govenment. Member of Committee
of Public Safety until guillotined April 1794.
De Gaulle, Charles: Only senior figure in French army to oppose
collaboration with Germany after June 1940. Figurehead for Resistance, based
in London. Premier of France 1944-46. Returned to office against background
of attempted coup in 1958, ran government until 1969.
De Valera, Éamon: Participant in 1916 Easter Rising, declared president of
Republic in 1919, opposed treaty with Britain 1921, elected prime minister of
26-county ‘free state’ 1932. Dominated government with brief period in
opposition until death 1959.
Deng Xiaoping: Veteran Chinese Communist leader, purged during Cultural
Revolution of 1966-67. Return to power after death of Mao in 1976,
dominated government and introduced market mechanisms. Responsible for
crushing of Tiananmen Square demonstrations of 1989.
Dollfuss, Engelbert: Chancellor of Austria 1932, proclaimed himself dictator
May 1933, put down socialist rising February 1934, assassinated by rival Nazi
organisation July 1934.
Dreiser, Theodore: Major American realist novelist of first third of 20th
century.
Durutti, Buenaventura: Most famous Spanish anarcho-syndicalist.
Assassinated archbishop of Saragossa in early 1920s, carried out bank
robberies in Latin America in late 1920s, imprisoned for leading uprisings
under second Spanish republic 1931-34. Helped organise rising against
attempted military coup in Barcelona July 1936, led military column into
Aragon, killed on Madrid front, end of 1936.
Eisner, Kurt: German Social Democrat in Munich, supported Bernstein’s
social reformism but opposed First World War. Revolutionary workers and
soldiers made him prime minister of Bavaria, November 1919. Murdered by
right wing officer.
Erasmus: Early 16th century north European thinker of Renaissance, born in
Holland and lived for time in England. Opposed Reformation, but condemned
by counter-Reformation.
Feuerbach, Ludwig: German materialist philosopher of 1840s who saw that
humans had created god, not vice versa.
Ford, Henry: Founder of Ford car company, established world’s first car
assembly plant, vehement opponent of trade unions, sympathetic to Hitler in
1930s.
Franco, Francisco: Spanish general, crushed Asturias rising 1934, led coup of
July 1936 and fascist forces in civil war. Dictator 1939-75.
Franklin, Benjamin: Rich printer and publisher in mid-18th century
Pennsylvania. Agent for US colonies in London, friend of French
Enlightenment intellectuals and scientist in his own right. Signatory to
Declaration of Independence in 1776.
Friedman, Milton: Free market economist, with ‘monetarist’ belief that if
governments control money supply properly crises are impossible.
Galileo: Astronomer and physicist of late 16th and early 17th century who laid
foundations of modern physics.
Gandhi, Mahatma: London educated lawyer who donned peasant clothes to
lead Indian national movement after First World War. Opposed violent
methods and strikes which might affect Indian capitalists, assassinated by
Hindu chauvinists 1948. No relation to Indira Gandhi.
Gibbon, Edward: English historian of 18th century whose Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire was scathing about influence of Christianity.
Giolitti, Giovanni: Bourgeois politician who dominated Italian government
before, during and immediately after First World War.
Gladstone, William: Dominant figure in Liberal Party, as main party of
industrial capital, in 19th century Britain.
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von: Leading poet, playwright and novelist in
Germany in late 18th and early 19th century.
Gomulka, Stanislaw: Leading Polish Communist in post-war years.
Imprisoned in last period of Stalin’s life. Returned to power to popular
acclaim in 1956. Imposed repression of his own. Driven from office by strikes
in 1969-70.
Gordon, Charles George: British soldier who helped destroy Summer Palace
in Beijing, then suppressed T’ai-p-ing rebellion in 1860s, killed at Siege of
Khartoum in 1885.
Gracchus, Caius: Reformer who became hero of Roman peasantry in 120s
BC. Like his brother, murdered by rich.
Gracchus, Tiberius: Reformer who became hero of Roman peasantry in 130s
BC, murdered by rich.
Gramsci, Antonio: Italian revolutionary Marxist. Leading figure in movement
to establish workers’ councils in Turin in 1919-20. Founder member of Italian
Communist Party 1921. Took over leadership 1924-26. Imprisoned by
Mussolini until shortly before his death in 1937. In prison, opposed Stalin’s
‘third period’.
Guesde, Jules: French socialist, in exile after Commune, led Marxist wing of
socialist movement until he joined war cabinet in 1914.
Guevara, Che: Young Argentian doctor among first of Castro’s guerrillas to
land in Cuba in 1956. In charge of industrialisation in revolutionary regime
established in 1959. Fell out with Soviet Union in mid-1960s, left Cuba to
spread revolution abroad. Murdered by CIA in Bolivia in 1967.
Harmsworth, Alfred: Later Lord Northcliffe. Newspaper proprietor who
produced first mass circulation right wing popular papers at end of 19th
century.
Hayek, Friedrich von: Rabid pro-market economist who inspired Margaret
Thatcher.
Healey, Denis: Leading figure in British Labour Party 1950s to 1980s.
Minister in 1964-70 and 1974-79 governments.
Hébert, Jacques: Radical Jacobin, backed by sans culottes in Great French
Revolution. Executed by Robespierre March 1794.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich: German philosopher of late 18th and early
19th century, developed dialectical method but in obscure way.
Helvetius: French materialist philosopher of 18th century, part of
Enlightenment.
Hidalgo, Miguel: Mexican priest who led uprising against Spanish in 1810,
shot in 1811.
Hilferding, Rudolf: Austrian Marxist economist, active in German socialist
movement. Attempted middle way between Bolshevism and right wing Social
Democracy in 1919-20. Social Democrat finance minister in coalition
governments of autumn of 1923 and 1928. Resigned 1929, impotent in face of
economic crisis. Murdered by Nazis in exile 1940.
Hindenburg, Paul von: Commanded German armed forces with near-
dictatorial power in First World War. President of German Republic 1925-34.
Appointed Hitler as chancellor January 1933.
Ho Chi Minh: Vietnamese Communist leader from 1920s. Leader of Vietminh
resistance to Japanese and French colonial rule. Ruler of North Vietnam after
1954, symbol of resistance to US in 1960s and early 1970s, ruler of all
Vietnam after May 1975.
Hobsbawm, Eric: British historian, Communist Party member for half a
century, author of four volumes of history from 1780s to present day.
Hugenberg, Alfred: German newpaper and film magnate, right wing leader of
conservative National Party, member of Hitler’s cabinet January-June 1933.
Iglesias, Pablo: Founded Spanish Socialist Party (PSOE) 1879, its president
until 1925.
Jefferson, Thomas: Plantation owner in Virginia in second half of 18th
century, drew up Declaration of Independence, president of US 1801-09.
John Knox: Leader of Calvinist Reformation in late 16th century Scotland.
Johnson, Lyndon Baines: President of US 1963-68.
Josephus: Jewish leader of revolt against Rome who switched sides and then
wrote famous history.
Justinian: Emperor of Byzantium mid-6th century AD. Tried to reconquer Italy
and north Africa. Oversaw completion of Saint Sophia cathedral.
Kautsky, Karl: Best known intellectual in German socialist movement after
death of Engels. Known as ‘pope of Marxism’, disliked First World War but
opposed revolutionary action against it. Opponent of Bolshevik Revolution.
Kennedy, Robert: Brother of J F Kennedy. Attorney-general during his
presidency of US 1960-63. Supporter of Vietnam War until popular opposition
to it exploded in 1968. Assassinated while campaigning for presidency.
Kepler, Johannes: Astronomer and mathematician who developed
Copernicus’s ideas in late 16th and early 17th centuries.
Kerensky, Alexander: Led Russian provisional government summer-autumn
1917.
Keynes, John Maynard: English liberal and free market economist who
became convinced of need for state intervention in 1930s.
Khrushchev, Nikita: Former Stalinist overlord in Ukraine who became leader
of USSR soon after Stalin’s death in 1953. Denounced Stalin in 1956 and
1958. Crushed Hungarian Revolution of 1956. Removed from office in 1964
by Brezhnev.
Kipling, Rudyard: British writer of late 19th and early 20th centuries, born in
India.
Kissinger, Henry: In charge of foreign policy for US Republican governments
1968-76. War criminal who received Nobel Peace Prize.
Kitchener, Lord: British general responsible for Omdurman (Sudan) massacre
of 1898 and concentration camps in Boer War in South Africa. Head of
military in First World War until death in 1916.
Lafargue, Paul: Son-in-law of Karl Marx, led Marxist wing of French
socialist movement until suicide in 1911.
Lafayette: French general, assisted American colonies in War of
Independence, dominant government figure first two years of French
Revolution, in exile under republic, helped Louis Philippe become king 1830.
Lamartine, Alphonse: French poet and historian who played key role in
French second republic of 1848.
Lenin, Vladimir: Early member of Marxist organisation in Russia, leader of
its Bolshevik wing after 1903. Leader of Soviet government after 1917,
incapacitated early 1923, died 1924.
Lewis, John L: Leader of US miners’ union, founded CIO union federation
mid-1930s.
Liebknecht, Karl: German Social Democrat MP, opponent of First World
War, founder member of Spartakusbund revolutionary group, imprisoned,
proclaimed socialist republic November 1918, murdered January 1919.
Liu Shaoqi (Liu Shao-ch’i): Leading Chinese Communist from late 1920s on.
President after 1962. Removed from office and disgraced during Cultural
Revolution 1966-67.
Lloyd George, David: A leader of British Liberal Party 1900-40. Introduced
radical budget before First World War, but formed coalition with Tories 1916
and ruled with them until 1922. Partitioned Ireland 1921.
Louis Bonaparte (also known as Napoleon III): Nephew of Napoleon
Bonaparte (Napoleon I), elected president of France 1848, emperor 1852-70.
Louis XIV: French king whose reign saw enormous growth in power of
monarchy, built palace at Versailles.
Louis XV: Ruler of France for much of first half of 18th century.
Loyola, Ignatius: Founded Jesuits to propagate Roman Catholicism forcefully
in mid-16th century.
Ludendorff, Erich: German general with virtually dictatorial powers
alongside Hindenburg in First World War. Allied with Hitler in 1923 but later
fell out with him.
Luther, Martin: Dissident German monk who led Protestant break with Rome
after 1517.
Luxemburg, Rosa: Born of Jewish family in Russian-occupied Poland in
1871. In exile from late 1880s. Leader of revolutionary left within both
German and Polish socialist movements. In prison in First World War,
murdered January 1919.
Macchiavelli, Niccolò: Civil servant in Florence around 1500, famous for his
book The Prince, which seems to glorify the most unscrupulous political
methods.
MacDonald, Ramsay: Founder member of Independent Labour Party in
Britain in mid-1890s, leader of Labour Party before First World War. Opposed
war from non-revolutionary standpoint 1914. Prime minister in Labour
minority governments 1924 and 1929-31. Switched sides to lead Tory
‘National’ government 1931-35.
Mahdi: Mohammed Ahmed, leader of Sudanese revolt against British-run
Egypt in 1880s.
Malraux, André: Left wing French writer of late 1920s and early 1930s.
Helped organise Republican air force in Spanish Civil War. Supporter of
General de Gaulle after Second World War. Minister in Gaullist governments
after 1958.
Malthus, Thomas: English clergyman of late 18th and early 19th centuries—
his theory of population claimed increasing their wealth would make the poor
poorer.
Mann, Tom: Engineering worker, played leading role in dock strike of 1889,
Great Unrest 1910-14, joined Communist Party 1921.
Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung): Leader of Chinese Communist Party from early
1930s and of Chinese government after 1949. Played only figurehead role
1962-66. Returned to full influence with ‘Cultural Revolution’. Died 1975.
Marat, Jean-Paul: Doctor to upper classes who became hero of poor during
French Revolution after 1789. Worked with Robespierre and Danton to
establish Jacobin government in 1793, hated by ‘moderates’ and assassinated
July 1793.
Marcuse, Herbert: German Marxist philosopher living in US after Hitler
came to power. Inspirer of many left wing ideas in 1968.
Marie-Antoinette: Austrian princess and queen of France executed by
revolution.
Marius: General who used support of poor to push for power in Rome around
100 BC.
Mary Stuart: Mary Queen of Scots, executed by Elizabeth I of England.
Mary Tudor: ‘Bloody Mary’, queen of England and wife of Philip II of Spain,
tried to reimpose Roman Catholicism in England in mid-16th century.
McClellan, George: Head of Northern army in American Civil War, 1861-62.
Medici: Name of merchant and banking family that dominated life of 15th and
16th century Florence. Patrons of many Renaissance artists. Included two
popes, and a 16th century French queen.
Moctezuma (sometimes Montezuma): Aztec ruler conquered by Spanish.
Molotov, Vyacheslav: Bolshevik activist in 1917, supporter of Stalin from
early 1920s, leading figure in Russian regime until purged by Khrushchev
1958.
Morelos, Jose Maria: Mexican priest, led revolt against Spanish after death
of Hidalgo, shot 1815.
Müntzer, Thomas (sometimes spelt Münzer): Religious revolutionary
during Reformation who played important role during Peasant War of 1525,
executed by princes with support of Martin Luther. Not to be confused with
town of Munster, which subsequent religious rebels seized in early 1530s.
Mussolini, Benito: Leader of Italian fascism. Started off as left wing socialist,
became enthusiastic nationalist in First World War. Took power 1922, invaded
Ethiopia 1935, joined war on German side 1940, overthrown in southern Italy
1943, ran pro-German puppet government in north, hanged upside down by
partisans 1945.
Nasser, Abdul: Army officer, led revolution against Egyptian monarchy 1952,
president 1956 until death in 1970. Inspired nationalists throughout Arab
world.
Nehru, Jawaharlal: Harrow-educated leader of Indian National Congress
from 1920s. Imprisoned Second World War, prime minister 1947-64.
Nixon, Richard: US president and war criminal, driven from office for
Watergate burglary of Democratic Party office in 1975.
Octavian: Later Roman emperor Augustus, nephew of Julius Caesar.
Orwell, George: English writer, socialist in 1930s, fought in Spain with far
left POUM party, supported revolutionary stance in Homage to Catalonia,
satirised Stalinism in Animal Farm and 1984.
Owen, Robert: Pioneering industrialist of early 19th century who became
convinced of need for form of socialism based on cooperative communities.
Paine, Tom: British-born artisan, leading pamphleteer for American
Revolution, returned to Britain to champion French Revolution, forced to flee
country and then imprisoned by Jacobins in France.
Palmerston, Lord: Dominant figure in many British Whig governments of
1830s to 1860s.
Papen, Franz von: Chancellor of Germany, May-November 1932, vice-
chancellor in Hitler’s government 1933-34, then ambassador for Nazi regime.
Paul, Saint: Saul of Tarsus, Jew with Roman citizenship, converted to
Christianity. Responsible for spread of Christianity across Greek and Roman
worlds and for most of its doctrines.
Perón, Juan: Colonel, president of Argentina 1946 with mass popular support
and dictatorial powers. Overthrown 1955. Returned to power mid-1973,
succeeded on death by wife ‘Isabelita’, who was overthrown by coup in 1976.
Pizarro, Francisco: Led Spanish conquest of Incas in early 1530s.
Plato: Ancient Greek philosopher, disciple of Socrates. His views influenced
Christian theology from 5th to 14th centuries.
Priestley, Joseph: Late 18th century English chemist, and enthusiast for
French Revolution.
Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph: French socialist writer of 1840s to 1860s, opposed
political action by workers, believed society should be run as ‘mutual’
association of independent small producers.
Ptolemy (Claudius): Mathematician and astronomer whose picture of universe
with sun and planets going round earth dominated throughout European Middle
Ages.
Radek, Karl: Polish revolutionary, joined Bolsheviks in 1917, leading figure
in early Communist International, supported Trotsky 1924-28, then went over
to Stalin. Died in slave labour camp after Moscow trials.
Robespierre, Maximilien: Lawyer from Arras in northern France who led
most revolutionary, ‘Jacobin’, section of bourgeoisie in 1789-94, when
executed.
Roosevelt, Franklin D: US president 1933-45.
Rothermere, Lord: Brother of Alfred Harmsworth (Lord Northcliffe), ran
press empire of his own, minister in British First World War government.
Supported fascist Blackshirts in mid-1930s.
Roux, Jacques: Ex-priest who played key role in agitating among sans
culottes of Paris in Great French Revolution. Committed suicide rather than
face execution February 1794.
Russell, Bertrand: Major British empiricist philosopher and polemicist from
1890s to 1960. Reformist socialist, opposed First World War and Vietnam
War.
Saint-Just, Louis: Close colleague of Robespierre during Great French
Revolution. Executed after Thermidor aged 27. Famous for statement, ‘Those
who half make a revolution dig their own graves.’
Sargon: First ruler to establish empire over all of Fertile Crescent, around
2300 BC.
Saul of Tarsus: Original name of Saint Paul.
Say, Jean Baptiste: French economist of early 19th century whose ‘law’
claimed overproduction impossible.
Serge, Victor: Born in Belgium to Russian family, jailed for anarchist
sympathies in France before First World War, exiled to Spain, went to Russia
1919 to join Bolsheviks, worked for Communist International, supported
Trotsky’s opposition to Stalin, freed to go to France just before Moscow trials,
escaped advancing German army to Mexico in 1940. Author of novels,
particularly The Case of Comrade Tulayev, Memoirs of a Revolutionary, and
history, Year One of the Russian Revolution.
Shaw, George Bernard: Major playwright and polemicist first half of 20th
century. Born in Dublin, lived in England. Founder of Fabian Society.
Shelley, Percy Bysshe: English poet of early 19th century, supporter of
revolutionary ideas, died in sailing accident 1822.
Shlyapnikov, Alexander: Bolshevik metal worker and organiser before and
during First World War, commissar for labour in revolutionary government in
1918, leader of ‘workers’ opposition’ in 1920-21, reconciled with Stalin in
mid-1920s, disappeared mid-1930s.
Smith, Adam: Scottish economist of 18th century, part of Scottish
Enlightenment, influenced both mainstream modern economics and Karl Marx.
Spartacus: Leader of best known slave revolt in ancient Rome.
Sulla: Roman general of 1st century BC, used vicious repression to break
opponents and poor.
Sun Yat-sen: Founder and leader of Chinese national movement and
Kuomintang party until death in 1925.
Thiers, Louis Adolphe: Former royal minister, president of French third
republic 1871, organised crushing of Paris Commune.
Thorez, Maurice: Leader of French Communist Party from late 1920s, vice-
premier of France 1945-47.
Tito, Josip: Communist leader of Yugoslavia 1945-80. Broke with Stalin
1948.
Tressell, Robert (Robert Noonan): Housepainter, socialist and novelist of
first decade 20th century, died in poverty 1911 aged 40.
Trotsky, Leon: Russian revolutionary from late 1890s, president of St
Petersburg Soviet 1905, opposed Lenin until joined Bolsheviks in 1917,
organiser of October insurrection, founder of Red Army, opposed Stalinism,
exiled from Russia 1929, assassinated by Stalin’s agent 1940.
Vargas, Getulio: Dictator of Brazil 1937-45, president 1950-54.
Wallenstein (sometimes Waldstein): General-in-chief of imperial armies
during first part of Thirty Years War. Assassinated on orders of emperor at the
height of his successes.
Webb, Beatrice and Sidney: Founders of Fabian version of gradualist
socialism in Britain in 1880s. Opposed Bolshevik Revolution, praised Stalin’s
Russia in 1930s.
Weber, Max: German sociologist of beginning of 20th century.
Wellington, Duke of: Head of British armies against Napoleon in Peninsular
War and Battle of Waterloo, later Tory prime minister.
Wells, H G: Popular English novelist 1890s to early 1940s, pioneer of science
fiction, populariser of science and history.
Wilberforce, William: English MP who led parliamentary campaign against
slave trade in late 18th and early 19th centuries.
Wilkes, John: 18th century English journalist and MP. Gained support of
London merchants and London mob, clashed with George III’s government,
was expelled from parliament and imprisoned. Later became Lord Mayor of
London and pillar of establishment.
Wilson, Woodrow: US president 1913-21.
Wycliffe, John: 14th century English precursor of Reformation.
Zhou Enlai (Chou En-lai): Prominent Chinese Communist from mid-1920s
onwards, prime minister throughout 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s.
Zola, Émile: Major French realist novelist of second half of 19th century,
sentenced to prison for defending Dreyfus.
Places
Aegean: Sea and islands to east and south east of Greece. Also sometimes
used for Bronze Age civilisation of mainland Greece.
Agra: Indian town, south of Delhi, where Taj Mahal is situated.
Alsace-Lorraine: Area now in north east of France, but annexed by Germany
between 1871 and 1919, and between 1940 and 1944.
Aragon: Inland north east region of modern Spanish state. Kingdom that
included Catalonia in late medieval and early modern times.
Armenia: Region east of Asia Minor, between Black and Caspian seas. Today
name of former Soviet republic.
Asia Minor: Asiatic part of modern Turkey, often called Anatolia.
Assyria: Area in what is today southern Turkey, centre of great Middle Eastern
empire in 7th century BC.
Bohemia: North western half of present day Czech Republic, with capital in
Prague. From 13th to 17th centuries important centre of (mainly German
speaking) Holy Roman Empire.
Burgundy: Territory in northern and eastern France that came close to
developing into separate state in 15th century.
Byzantium: City on stretch of water connecting Mediterranian to Black Sea.
From 4th century on called Constantinople and, from late 15th century,
Istanbul. Also name given to Greek speaking remnant of Roman Empire from
5th to 15th centuries.
Castile: Central region in Spain, where modern Spanish state and language
originated.
Catalonia: Province in north east of Spanish state, stretching south from
French border, with its own language. In medieval period separate entity,
including parts of southern France. In 20th century contained strong nationalist
movement, and today has own parliament within Spanish state.
Charleston: Important port-city in South Carolina in US.
Cordoba: City in Spain that was a centre of Islamic civiliation in Middle
Ages. Also Argentian city.
Fertile Crescent: Region of Middle East including Palestine, Lebanon,
northern Syria and most of Iraq.
Flanders: Medieval name for western Belgium around Ghent and Bruges and
northern slice of France between Lille and Dunkirk. Today name for half of
Belgium in which they speak version of Dutch known as ‘Flemish’.
Gaul: Roman name for what is now France. Included northern slice of Italy.
Giza: Couple of miles due west of modern Cairo, where biggest Egyptian
pyramids were built.
Granada: Last Moorish city to fall to Spanish monarchy.
Hanseatic cities: German ports on North Sea and Baltic in late medieval
period.
Harappa: Third millennium BC city on Indus.
Hellespont Straits: West of Istanbul joining Mediterranean to Black Sea, also
called Dardanelles.
Hispaniola: Name for Caribbean island including modern Haiti and
Dominican Republic.
Holy Roman Empire: Empire originally established by Charlemagne in 9th
century. Persisted as disparate collection of territories in Germany, eastern
Europe and Italy until 19th century, when it became known as Austrian Empire
and then Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Iberian Peninsula: Term for Spain and Portugal.
Indochina: Region of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.
Indus Valley: Today eastern part of Pakistan, close to Indian border.
Ionian: Sea and islands to west of Greece.
Kampuchea: Cambodia.
Knossos: Site of palace of Crete civilisation of 2000 to 1500 BC.
Lagash: City state in third millennium BC Mesopotamia.
Low Countries: Region including present day Belgium and Holland.
Macedonia: Region in Balkans north of Greece.
Maghreb: North African region including Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia.
Mahagda: State in 6th century BC northern India that led to Mauryan Empire.
Mecca: Trading city in western Arabian peninsula. Birthplace of Mohammed
and most important holy city of Islam. Today in Saudi Arabia.
Meso-America: Region including Mexico and Guatemala.
Mesopotamia: Old name for what is now Iraq. Literally means ‘between two
rivers’—ie valley of Euphrates and Tigris.
Mohenjo-dero: Third millennium BC city on Indus.
Nanking: Chinese city on Yangtze, upriver from Shanghai.
New Lanark: Town near Glasgow where Robert Owen managed ‘model’
factories.
Nubia: Region of southern Egypt and northern Sudan.
Palatine: Area of western Germany, principality during Holy Roman Empire.
Phoenicia: Name for coast of Lebanon in ancient world.
Piedmont: Area in northern Italy around Turin, ruled by king who became king
of Italy in late 1860s.
Prussia: Kingdom in eastern Germany centred on Berlin, whose ruler became
emperor of Germany in 1870. Biggest state in Germany until 1945.
Rhineland: Area of south west Germany, adjacent to French and Belgian
borders.
Ruhr: Area in Germany, north of Rhineland and close to Belgian border, main
centre of German indusrial revolution.
Saint Domingue: Name for Haiti before slave revolt of 1790s.
Samarkand: Imporant trading city in central Asia throughout Middle Ages.
Saqqara: Few miles south east of modern Cairo, where first pyramids and
tombs built.
Silesia: Area in south of present day Poland. Disputed between Poles and
Germans until end of Second World War.
Sparta: City state on southern mainland of ancient Greece, historic rival of
Athens.
Sumer: Name for Mesopotamian civilisation of third century BC.
Tenochtitlan: Aztec capital, rebuilt as Mexico City by Spanish conquerors.
Teotihuacan: City and name of civilisation built in first centuries AD close to
present day Mexico City.
Thebes: Ancient Egyptian city, capital in Middle and New Kingdoms, close to
present day Luxor (also, confusingly, name of an ancient Greek city state).
Third World: Term used after 1950s to describe former colonial and semi-
colonial countries.
Thuringia: Region of central Germany.
Transylvania: Mountainous region between modern Hungary and Romania,
claimed by both.
Ulster: Northern nine counties of Ireland, used by pro-British Loyalists to
describe six-county statelet established in 1921.
Uruk: City state in 3rd millennium BC Mesopotamia.
Valley of Mexico: Area around present day Mexico City, centre of
Teotihuacan and Aztec civilisations.
Valmy: Place in northern France where revolutionary army won first great
victory against royalist invaders in 1792.
Versailles: Town ouside Paris where Louis XIV established great palace.
Centre of force directed against Paris Commune in 1871. Meeting place of
conference which carved up world at behest of Britain and France in aftermath
of First World War.
Waterloo: Village in France where Napoleon suffered final defeat in 1815.
Not to be confused with London railway station of same name.
Yangtze: Great river running west to east across middle of China. Enters sea
near Shanghai.
Yellow River: Great river running southwards then west to east across
northern China. Centre of first Chinese civilisations. Has changed course with
catastrophic results historically.
Terms
Abbasids: Dynasty that ruled Islamic Empire in Middle East from mid-8th to
13th century, without real power after 10th century.
Absolutism/absolutist monarchy: Powerful monarchic regimes that existed in
countries like France, Spain, Prussia, Austria and Russia from mid-17th
century onwards.
Acropolis: Hill overlooking Athens on which stands the Parthenon, a temple
built in 6th century BC.
Active citizens: Men with votes under property franchise in France 1790-92.
Ahimsa: Non-violence in Buddhism and some versions of Hinduism.
Anarcho-syndicalism: Movement combining trade union methods of struggle
with anarchist notions.
Ancien régime: French for ‘old regime’, name often given to social order in
Europe prior to French Revolution.
Arianism: Version of Christianity very influential in 5th century AD which
disagreed with Catholicism on interpretation of trinity.
Artisan: Slightly archaic term referring to someone, usually self employed,
skilled in handicraft production.
Aryans: People who invaded north India around 1500 BC. Spoke an Indo-
European language. Not be confused with ‘Arian’ heresy prevalent in 5th
century AD Christianity.
Auto da fé: Place of execution for ‘heretics’, victims of the Inquisition.
Bantu: Family of languages spoken in west, central and southern Africa.
Barbarians: Old term for purely agricultural form of society, used by Morgan,
Engels and Gordon Childe.
Battle of White Mountain: Where Bohemian forces suffered first big defeat
in Thirty Years War.
Boer War 1899-1902: War over British annexation of mineral rich Boer
territory in southern Africa.
Boers: Dutch speaking white settlers in southern Africa, also called
Afrikaners.
Bourbon: Family name of French monarchs of 17th and 18th centuries, and of
Spanish monarchs after early 18th century.
Bourgeoisie: Originally French term for middle class town dwellers, used
since early 19th century to mean members of capitalist class.
Bronze Age: Term sometimes used to describe period of urban revolution in
Eurasia and Africa.
Burghers: Full citizens of medieval and early modern towns, usually
merchants or independent craftsmen. Sometimes called ‘burgesses’ in England.
Origin of French word ‘bourgeois’.
Carmagnole: French revolutionary dance.
Carlists: Supporters of rival dynasty to Spanish monarchy, bitter opponents of
even mildest schemes for modernisation or liberalisation, from 1830s to
fascist victory in 1939.
Caste: Form of social organisation in which people are born into a specific
social category from which they cannot (in theory) escape. Associated with
Hinduism. Hierarchy of castes often, in practice, cuts across hierarchy based
on class power, so that today not all upper-caste Hindus are rich, although the
great majority of the members of the lowest castes are poor.
Cavaliers: Name given to royalist troops in English Civil War.
CGT: Main French trade union federation, founded by syndicalists before First
World War, run by Communist Party since Second World War.
Ch’in: Empire that united northern China in 221 BC.
Chieftainship: Anthropologists’ term for society in which some people have
higher standing than others but there is no clear division into class and no
separate state.
Chin: Turkic Dynasty that ruled northern half of China in 12th century.
Chou: Dynasty that ran a loose ‘feudal’ empire in China after about 1100 BC.
Clan: See lineage.
CNT (Confederación Nacional de Trabajo): Anarcho-syndicalist led union
in Spain.
Communards: Participants in Paris Commune of 1871.
Commune: Term often used for a medieval town, or for the council which ran
it. Used for city council of Paris during revolution of 1789-95. Used to
describe elected revolutionary committee which ran city for workers in 1871.
Used to describe ‘collective’ (effectively state-run) farms in China in late
1950s and 1960s.
Communist International (Comintern): Centralised international
organisation of revolutionary parties established in 1919, dominated by Stalin
from mid-1920s until dissolved during Second World War.
Concessions: European or Japanese governed enclaves within Chinese cities.
Confucianism: Ideology dominant among bureaucratic and landowning class
in China through most of last 2,000 years.
Constituent assembly: Elected parliamentary-type body that exists simply to
establish new constitution.
Convention: Name for France’s elected national assembly during
revolutionary years 1792-96.
Council of Trent: Council of Catholic church used to launch counter-
Reformation against Protestantism.
Crown prince: Heir to throne.
Duma: Parliament in pre-revolutionary Russia, elected on undemocratic basis.
East India Company: Monopoly set up by English crown for trading with
south Asia in early 17th century. Conquered and ran much of India between
1760s and 1850s. Replaced by direct British government rule after mutiny of
1857.
Eastern Question: Problem posed by major powers by long drawn out
weakening and fragmentation of Turkish Empire in Balkan and Black Sea
regions.
Elector: Term for some princes of Holy Roman Empire in Germany.
Émigrés: Term used to describe aristocrats who fled and plotted against
revolution in France.
Enclosures: Fencing of formerly open farm and common land by landowners
and capitalist farmers, so forcing poorer peasants either to abandon the land
for life in the towns or to become agricultural labourers.
Enlightenment: 18th century intellectual current which attempted to replace
superstition by scientific reasoning—associated with Voltaire, Diderot,
Rousseau, Hume, Gibbon.
Equites: Name for groups of new rich excluded from power in 1st century BC
Rome by Senatorial families.
Estates: Term for legally defined social strata with different legal rights and
responsibilities—lords, knights and burghers, for instance, in medieval
Europe, and nobility, clergy and others in pre-revolutionary France. Also
sometimes used to describe parliamentary-type bodies which contained
representatives of different groups (eg in Bohemia at time of Thirty Years
War).
Estates-General: Assemblies from representatives of three sections of French
population under pre-revolutionary monarch—nobles, clergy and others—met
in 1789 for first time in 175 years.
Falange: Name given to movements inspired in Spain and Lebanon by Italian
fascism.
Fatimids: Dynasty that ruled Egypt in 11th and 12th centuries.
FBI (Federal Bureau of Investigation): Federal US police and secret police
organisation.
Fédérés: Volunteers from outside Paris who marched to the city to defend the
French Revolution in 1792.
Feudal dues: Payment which peasants had to make to feudal lords, even when
no longer serfs.
Foraging: Better term for hunting and gathering.
Franciscans: Christian religious order based on teachings of St Francis in
early 13th century. Stressed virtues of poverty but safely incorporated by
feudal church.
Fratelli: 13th century Christians whose doctrines were similar to St Francis’s
but drew near-revolutionary conclusions from them. Persecuted by church.
Freikorps: Right wing mercenary force used against German workers in 1919-
20.
Fronde: Short period of political turmoil in mid-17th century France which
only briefly interrupted the strengthening of the domination of the aristocracy
by the monarchy.
Gens: See lineage.
Gentry: Well-to-do landowners, as distinct from great aristocrats. Used in
relation both to Sung China and to 17th and 18th century England.
Girondins: Less revolutionary wing of Jacobin club in French Revolution
1791-92, in bitter opposition to Robespierre.
Goths (also Visigoths, Ostrogoths, Franks): Germanic peoples who
conquered various parts of former Roman Empire in west in 5th century AD
and after.
Great Depression: Period of economic crises in late 1870s and 1880s. The
term is also sometimes used to refer to 1930s.
Great Inca: Term for Inca emperor.
Grisettes: Colloquial expression for young French working class women in
19th century.
Guilds: Organisations of artisans and craftspeople designed to protect interests
by regulating prices and quality of goods. Often sponsored by monarchy or city
state.
Guptas: Emperors ruling part of India in early centuries AD.
Habeas corpus: Legal rule preventing imprisonment without trial.
Hadiths: Collection of sayings ascribed to prophet Mohammed.
Han: Dynasty that ruled China from 206 BC to AD 220. Also term sometimes
used to refer to ethnic Chinese as opposed to other inhabitants of the country.
Hellenes: Greeks.
Helots: Serfs working land in ancient Sparta.
Hidalgo: Spanish word for ‘gentleman’.
Holy Communion: Christian rite in which priest drinks wine and feeds bread
to congregation, held by Catholics and Lutherans (but not Calvinists) to
involve consumption of ‘blood and body of Christ’. Cause of enormous
disputes in Reformation.
Home Rule: Scheme for Britain to devolve certain powers to the parliament
of a united Ireland.
Horticulture: Simplest form of agriculture, involving use of light tools like
digging stick and hoe.
Huguenots: French Protestants who followed ideas of Calvin, driven into
exile in 17th century.
Huns: People from central Asia who invaded Europe and northern India from
late 4th century onwards. Eventually some settled in modern Hungary.
Hussites: Religious rebels in early 15th century Bohemia, precursors of
Protestant Reformation of 17th century.
Hyksos: People who attacked Egypt around 1700 to 1600 BC, usually
considered to be from Palestine.
Independent Labour Party: Precursor of Labour Party in 1890s Britain,
existed as part of Labour Party from 1906 until early 1930s. Independent
Social Democrats (Independents): Left parliamentary socialist split from
German social democracy during the First World War. Half joined Communists
in 1920, other half went back to main social democratic party.
Independents: Name given to ‘Win The War’ group around Cromwell in
English Civil War. See also Independent Social Democrats.
Indo-European: Family of languages including Greek, Latin, German,
Russian, Sanskrit, Hindi, Urdu, Persian, Kurdish.
Inquisition: Institution of Catholic church in late medieval and early modern
period for stamping out heresy.
Izvestia: Paper started by workers’ soviets in 1917 Russia. From 1920s to
late 1980s, mouthpiece of Russian government.
Jacobins: Members of most important revolutionary club in Paris after 1789-
94. At first included ‘moderates’ like Girondins as well as more revolutionary
elements. Later term was applied to most determined section, led by
Robespierre. Used outside France to refer to all supporters of the revolution.
Jesuits (Society of Jesus): Religious order founded in mid-16th century to
combat Reformation. Seen as centre of religious reaction by Protestants and
free thinkers alike until 20th century. Briefly became vehicle for exponents of
left wing ‘liberation theology’ after 1960s until purged by pope.
Journée: Term used to describe mobilisation of Parisian population for revolt
during French Revolution.
Journeymen: Skilled workers employed in workshops of late medieval and
early modern Europe—they would often expect to become self employed
master craftsmen one day.
Junkers: Landed nobility of eastern regions of 18th and 19th century Germany.
Kadets: Constitutional Democrat Party in pre-revolutionary Russia, opposed
to Tsarist absolutism but also to workers’ movement.
Kaiser: German emperor.
Kulak: Russian term for capitalist farmer or rich peasant.
Kuomintang: Chinese nationalist party, government of China 1927-49,
government of Taiwan since.
Kush: Name for ancient Nubian civilisation.
Latifundia: Term for large landed estates in both ancient Rome and modern
Latin America.
Left Hegelians: Group of liberal-democratic intellectuals in 1840s Germany
who turned ideas of conservative philosopher Hegel against Prussian
monarchy.
Lineage: Form of social organisation which links people on basis of blood
relationships—also called ‘clan’ or ‘gens’.
Luddites: Weavers and stocking-makers who destroyed new machinery
installed by capitalists in great wave of revolt in 1811-16—often used as
derogatory term meaning opponents of technical progress.
Madrasas: Islamic religious schools.
Mamlukes: Soldiers of Turkish origin in Middle East empires of Middle
Ages. Formally slaves, they seized power in Egypt in 12th century and ruled it
until Ottoman conquest in 1517.
Manicheism: Religion founded by Mani in 3rd century AD which combined
Christian, Buddhist and Zoroastrian notions.
Materialism: View which denies that spirit or thought can exist independently
of material existence.
Maurya: Empire that united most of present day India in 4th century BC.
Mayas: Inhabitants of southern Mexico and Guatemala who established
civilisation from about AD 700.
Mechanics: Old word for artisans or craftsmen.
Meiji Revolution: Change which ended Japanese feudalism in 1860s.
Mensheviks: Wing of socialist movement in Russia after 1903 that tended to
look to collaboration with the bourgeoisie.
Middle Kingdom: Egypt from about 2000 to 1780 BC.
Middling people: Embryonic middle class of small farmers and tradesmen at
time of English Civil War.
Ming: Dynasty which ruled China from AD 1368 to 1644.
Mongols: People from east and central Asia who moved right across Eurasia,
invading kingdoms and empires in Middle East, eastern Europe, Iran, India and
China from 12th to 14th centuries.
Monophysites: Christians in Middle East who disagreed over interpretation of
trinity with both Catholics and Arians.
Moguls: Dynasty that ruled most of India from 1526 to early part of 18th
century.
Mycenae: Civilisation on southern mainland of Greece about 1500 BC.
Narodniks: Literally ‘populists’. Russian revolutionaries prior to 1917 who
looked towards peasants rather than workers.
National Guards: Volunteer forces recruited from middle class in France in
early 1790s and in 19th century Europe, transformed into working class force
during siege of Paris in 1870-71.
National Liberals: Big business backed section of German former liberals
who backed imperialist regime after 1871. Became People’s Party after
revolution of 1918.
Neolithic: Literally ‘new Stone Age’, involves use of sophisticated stone and
wooden tools, and pottery.
Neolithic revolution: Introduction of new way of life based on these tools,
involving living in large villages and simple agriculture.
NEP (New Economic Policy): Market mechanisms in Russia between 1921
and 1928.
Nestorian: Version of Christianity banned by Roman and Byzantium churches.
Influential in medieval central Asia and China.
New Kingdom: Egypt from 1550 to 1075 BC.
New Model Army: Reorganised parliamentary forces that defeated royalists
in English Civil War and then carried through English Revolution of 1649.
Noblesse d’epée: Traditional French nobility.
Noblesse de robe: Section of French nobility whose wealth came from
hereditary control of parts of legal system—originally recruited by monarchs
from well-to-do middle class.
Norsemen: People from Scandinavia who raided western and Mediterranean
Europe in 9th and 10th centuries AD, before settling in England, Scotland,
Ireland, Iceland, Russia, Normandy and Sicily. Also known as ‘Vikings’.
Old Kingdom: First civilisation in Egypt from 3000 to about 2100 BC.
Oligarchy: Ancient Greek term meaning ‘rule by a few’.
Olmecs: First civilisation to arise in Mexico and Guatemala, in last
millennium BC.
Orange: Originally family name of Dutch princes, used since 18th century to
describe Protestant haters of Catholics and supporters of British rule in
Ireland.
Ottomans: Leaders of a Turkic people who conquered Asia Minor from both
Islamic empires and Byzantium in late medieval period, before expanding right
across north Africa, Middle East and Balkans.
Parlements: Term used in pre-revolutionary France for certain important
courts.
Passive citizens: Those without vote under property franchise in France 1790-
92.
Pastoralists: Societies based on herding of cattle, sheep, camels or llamas.
Patriarchy: Term for society structured around households under the
domination of the most senior males, who tell other males, women and
servants what to do. Misused by many feminists to apply to all societies with
women’s oppression.
Patricians: Hereditary ruling elite in early period of Roman republic.
Petty bourgeoisie (or petite bourgeoisie): Literally ‘little bourgeoisie’.
Referred originally to small shopkeepers, tradespeople, small capitalist
farmers and so on. Extended to include professions and middle management
grades among white collar employees.
Phonograph: Precursor of gramophone and record player.
Platonism: View which holds material world is simply imperfect reflection of
ideal concepts.
Plebeians: Ordinary citizens of early Roman Republic, owning small amounts
of land. Used in later times to describe poorer section of urban population, or
simply those of lower class upbringing.
Popular Front: Russian Stalinist-inspired attempt to create coalitions of
workers’ parties and ‘progressive bourgeoisie’ in 1930s and after.
Presbyterians: Name given to Scottish Calvinist Protestants, also applied to
those on parliamentary side in English Civil War who wanted to do deal with
royalists.
Proletarians: Originally inhabitants of ancient Rome who owned no property
at all. In modern times, term used by Marx to describe wage workers.
Provisional government: Non-elected government running Russia between
February and October 1917.
Putting-out: System by which merchants would provide self employed
craftspeople with raw materials and tools in return for control over their
produce, enabling merchants to make profits from production. Step on way to
full blown industrial capitalism.
Pythagoreanism: Named after early mathematician of ancient Greece, sees
numbers and mathematical formulae as having magical qualities.
Quakers: Originally revolutionary sect at time of English Revolution, later
became pacifist Christians. A few became very rich and dominated American
colony of Pennsylvania.
Radical Party: Main party of French middle class in pre Second World War
France.
Restoration: Term used in Britain in 1660 and in Europe in 1814-15 to
describe restoration of monarchy after revolutionary period.
SA: German Nazi Stormtrooper paramilitary organisation.
Sahib: Indian word meaning ‘sir’, used to describe British colonists.
Samurai: Privileged knightly layer in Japan before 1860s.
Sans culottes: Poorer section of French population at time of French
Revolution, mainly artisans and families, but some workers.
Second serfdom: Reimposition of serfdom in eastern Europe from 16th
century onwards, used to provide grain which nobles would sell in west
European markets.
Sections: Term used to describe regular mass meetings of people in each part
of Paris during French Revolution.
Semitic: Name for a family of languages originating in the Middle East,
including Hebrew, Arabic and Aramaic. Often applied to peoples originating
in the region, especially Jews. Hence also ‘anti-Semitic’.
Serfs: Peasants who are half free, working some of the land on their own
behalf but compelled to provide either unpaid labour, goods-in-kind or money
payments to a lord whose land they are not allowed to leave.
Seven Years War: War in mid-1750s between France and Britain over
domination of North America and Atlantic trade. Resulted in Britain getting
control of Canada and first colonisation of India.
Shang: Earliest dynasty to rule an empire in China, around 1600 BC.
Shi’ites: Followers of main minority version of Islam, the majority in Iran,
southern Iraq and parts of Lebanon today.
Sikhism: North Indian religion, founded in 16th century, in opposition to caste
system and in effort to unify Hinduism and Islam.
Social Revolutionary Party: Russian party in first quarter of century that
claimed to base itself on peasants, in practice led by lawyers.
Society of Jesus: See Jesuits.
Soviet: Literally Russian for ‘council’. Used in 1905 and 1917 to refer to
workers’ and soldiers’ councils. Later used as short-cut expression for regime
in Russia.
Soviet Union (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics): Name adopted by
republics of former Russian Empire in 1924 and then for Stalinist Empire,
dissolved in 1991.
Spartakusbund: Literally Spartacus League, German revolutionary group
during First World War.
SPD: Social Democratic Party of Germany.
SRs: Members of Social Revolutionary Party in Russia.
SS: Originally Hitler’s personal guard, developed into military core of Nazi
regime, responsible for death camps.
Stalinism: Support for Stalin’s doctrines and methods. More generally, term
for state capitalist form of organisation existing in Russia and other Eastern
bloc states until 1989-91.
Sudras: Indian caste associated with toiling on the land. In ancient four-caste
system below priests, warriors and cultivators, but above ‘out-castes’.
Sung: Dynasty ruling all of China from AD 960 to 1127, and then southern
China until 1279.
Sunnis: Majority version of Islam.
T’ai-p’ing: Rebellion in mid-19th century China.
T’ang: Dynasty ruling China from AD 618 to 907.
Tainos: Columbus’s name for first indigenous people he came across in
Caribbean.
Taoism: Popular religious ideology in China through much of last 2,500 years.
Associated with various magical beliefs, but also could encourage practical
experimentation.
Tariffs: Taxes applied to imports into a country.
Tax farmers: Name given to rich contractors who bought right to collect taxes
for state in ancient Rome, Abbasid Empire, Byzantium and pre-revolutionary
France, among other places.
Thermidor: Term used for counter-revolutionary coup against Jacobins in
France in summer of 1794, based on revolution’s name for month in which it
occurred, used since (eg in Russia) to describe beginnings of counter-
revolution.
Third period: Stalin’s policy of Communist parties treating socialist parties
and trade unions as ‘social fascists’.
Tithes: Sort of tax paid by peasants and artisans to church, which often passed
into pockets of nobles.
Tokugawa: Name of feudal family who dominated Japan from early 17th
century until 1860s, often used to describe that whole period of Japanese
feudalism.
Tories: Originally sympathisers with Stuart monarchy in late 17th century and
early 18th century Britain, then one of two ruling class parties. Term used in
America to describe royalists during War of Independence. Today means
supporters of Conservative Party.
Tribute: Sum of money levied from people of a conquered country.
UGT: Socialist Party influenced trade union organisation in Spain.
Ultraquists: Religious denomination based on Hussite principles in Bohemia.
Did not grant priest any special position in mass.
Ultras: Term sometimes used to mean out-and-out reactionaries, not to be
confused with ‘ultra-left’.
Umayyads: Dynasty that ruled Islamic Empire in Middle East from mid-7th to
mid-8th centuries.
Unionists: Supporters of British rule over Ireland.
United Front: Tactic of defensive alliances between revolutionary and non-
revolutionary workers’ parties and unions, formulated by Lenin and Trotsky in
1920-21.
Urban revolution: Term for transformation of society that involved rise of
classes, state, towns, and often metallurgy and literacy.
USSR: See Soviet Union.
Utopian Socialism: Set of doctrines in early 19th century that society needs to
be organised along planned, cooperative lines, but that this can be done
without revolution, by finding a benevolent ruler or by forming cooperative
communities—associated in France with Comte de Saint-Simon and Charles
Fourier, in Britain with Robert Owen.
Vedic: Ancestor of present day Hindu religion, involved sacrifice of cattle.
Vendée: Region in west of France where royalist revolt against revolution
occurred in 1792.
Viceroy: Governor of colonised country enjoying near-kingly (absolute)
powers.
Vietnam syndrome: US ruling class fear after mid-1970s of getting involved
in a war it could not win.
Villeins: Medieval serfs.
Whig: Forerunner of Liberal Party. Party originally associated with
constitutional settlement in Britain in 1688. In early 19th century came to
identify with industrial as opposed to landed section of ruling class. Also used
of view of English history which sees everything as perfect evolution to liberal
present.
Workhouse: Building where unemployed and poor were compelled to work in
return for food and shelter.
Zamindars: Class of local notables who lived off share of land taxes in Mogul
India, transformed into modern landowning class after British conquest.
Zapotecs: People in southern Mexico who established Monte Alban
civilisation after AD 500.
Zoroastrianism: Religion of Iran before rise of Islam. Involves belief in
eternal struggle between good and evil. Survives today among small Parsee
communities in Indian subcontinent.
Further reading
This list is not meant to be at all comprehensive. It aims simply to suggest a
few easily readable books which will enable the reader to go a little deeper
into the issues raised in each section. Anyone who wants to do more than that
should look at the end notes to the main text. Books in print can be ordered
from Bookmarks bookshop, 1 Bloomsbury Street, London WC1B 3QE,
telephone 020 7637 1848.
Part one: The rise of class societies
Eleanor Leacock’s Myths of Male Dominance is the most accessible account
of hunter-gatherer societies. Richard Lee’s The !Kung San looks in depth at
one of them, as does Richard Turnbull’s The Forest People. Marshall Sahlins’
Stone Age Economics examines the original affluent society and the change
from egalitarian societies to chieftainships.
V Gordon Childe’s What Happened in History remains by far the most
accessible account of the Neolithic and urban revolutions in Eurasia, although
some of its material and chronology is dated. For a revised chronology, see
Colin Renfrew, Before Civilisation. For ancient Egypt, see Bruce Trigger and
others, Ancient Egypt, A Social History, for the Americas, Frederick Katz’s
Ancient American Civilisations.
Part two: The ancient world
Again Gordon Childe is invaluable. Jean Gernet’s A History of Chinese
Civilisation is a very good introduction, as is Romila Thapar’s Penguin
History of India volume 1. Geoffrey de Ste Croix’s Class Struggles in the
Ancient Greek World is a detailed analysis of Greek slavery and the decline of
the Roman Empire. For the earlier history of Rome, see P A Brunt’s Social
Conflicts in the Roman Republic. I am critical of some points in Karl
Kautsky’s The Foundations of Christianity, and of many points in his politics,
but it should be read. Henry Chadwick’s The Early Church is useful in looking
at the institutionalisation of Christianity.
Part three: The ‘Middle Ages’
Peter Brown’s The World of Late Antiquity and The Rise of Western
Christendom look at early developments in Western Europe, Byzantium and
the Middle East. Gernet again provides a good account of Chinese
developments. The collection of essays edited by W Haeger, Crisis and
Prosperity in Sung China, examine a key period in depth, and the various
volumes of Colin Ronan’s abridgement of the work of Joseph Needham on
Chinese science, C Ronan and J Needham, The Shorter Science and
Civilisation of China, are a revelation not only about Chinese science and
technology, but also about technical development in general. The most
accessible introduction to the Byzantine Empire is Cyril Mango’s Byzantium.
Bernard Lewis’s The Arabs in History provides the most accessible overview
of early Islamic history, as do Maxine Rodinson’s Mohammed and Islam and
Capitalism.
Basil Davidson played a pioneering role in exploring African history and
his Africa in History and The Search for Africa are very useful, although new
discoveries are continually being made in this field now the hold of colonial
prejudice is finally dying. For Europe, Marc Bloch’s two volume Feudal
Society remains the best general introduction, and Jacques Le Goff’s Medieval
Civilisation is very accessible. Guy Bois’s two books, The Transformation of
the Year 1000 (on the rise of feudal production) and The Crisis of Feudalism,
are more technical but invaluable. Rodney Hilton deals with this crisis, in a
similar way to Bois, in his Class Struggle and the Crisis of Feudalism. Jean
Gimpel’s The Medieval Machine is a readable account of the changes in
technology and the first rediscovery of ancient learning in the 14th century.
Part four: The great transformation
There is still nothing to beat the first part of The Communist Manifesto for
providing an overview of the sweep of the changes which occurred. The three
volumes of Fernand Braudel’s Capitalism and Civilisation, covering the 15th
to the 18th centuries, spell out in detail the changes in people’s lives and world
politics with the rise of market, but are necessarily a little detailed. R S
Duplessis’s Transitions to Capitalism in Early Modern Europe provides a
shorter summary account of economic changes in Europe over the three
centuries. The social character of the German Reformation is dealt with well
in Thomas Brady’s The Politics of the Reformation in Germany, P Bickle’s
Communal Reformation, and J Abray’s The People’s Reformation. Karl
Kautsky’s Communism in Europe in the Age of the Reformation remains
worth reading, as does Engels’ The Peasant War in Germany. Henry Heller’s
confusingly titled The Conquest of Poverty is a marvellous analysis of the
class roots of Calvinism in France. J V Polisensky’s The Thirty Years War is
central to understanding one of the most confusing events in European history.
So much has been written on the English Revolution, particularly by
Christopher Hill and Brian Manning, it is difficult to know what to
recommend, but for a good starting point try Hill’s The Century of Revolution
and God’s Englishman, Brian Manning’s Aristocrats, Plebeians and
Revolution in England, and Gentile’s The New Model Army. On China, once
again Gernet is to be recommended. On India, read Burton Stein, A History of
India, while Irfan Habib’s Agrarian Structure of Mogul India is important for
a deeper understanding of what happened in India while Western Europe was
first beginning to overtake the rest of the world—but avoid Spear’s History of
India part 2 as it is dry and difficult to follow.
Part five: The spread of the new order
George Rudé’s Europe in the 18th Century provides an overview of West
European developments, R S Duplessis an overview of economic changes, and
Angus Calder’s Revolutionary Empire an overview of the rise of Britain and
its colonies. Robin Blackburn’s The Making of New World Slavery updates
Eric Williams’ classic Capitalism and Slavery and details the rise of racist
ideas. Patrick Manning’s Slavery and African Life looks at the impact on
Africa. Keith Thomas’s Religion and the Decline of Magic details the growth
of scientific ways of looking at the world in the 17th century, while various
books by Robert Darnton (for instance, The Business of the Enlightenment)
look at its social roots in the 18th. Isaac Rubin’s Marxist work A History of
Economic Thought contains a very useful account of Adam Smith’s ideas.
Part six: The world turned upside down
Eric Hobsbawm’s two volumes, The Age of Revolution and The Age of
Capital, provide a view of the long sweep, especially as regards Europe.
Gernet provides a similar overview for China, worth supplementing with
Franz Schurmann and Orville Scholl’s compilation, Imperial China. Edward
Countryman’s The American Revolution is indispensable for the War of
Independence, as is James McPherson’s The Battle Cry of Freedom for the
American Civil War. Albert Soboul’s The French Revolution, Peter
Kropotkin’s The Great French Revolution and André Guerin’s Class Struggle
in the First French Republic provide three differing perspectives, all very
readable. C L R James’s The Black Jacobins is the classic account of the slave
rebellion in Haiti. Edward Thompson’s The Making of the English Working
Class covers the period from the 1780s to the 1830s, and Dorothy Thompson’s
The Chartists carries the story through into the Chartist movement. Frederick
Engels’ The Condition of the Working Class in England gives a graphic
accounts of what the industrial revolution did to working people’s lives, and
John Saville’s 1848 is a detailed study of the conflicts in Britain and Ireland in
that year. Roger Price’s Documents on the French Revolution of 1848 is very
useful, as is Jonathan Sperber’s Rhineland Revolutionaries. Karl Marx’s
Class Struggles in France and The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte
and Frederick Engels’ Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany
(mistakenly published in Marx’s name in some older editions) are pioneering
analyses. On Marx and Engels themselves, there is Alex Callinicos’s excellent
The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx and Franz Mehring’s classic biography
Karl Marx. Lissigaray’s The History of the Paris Commune, Jelinek’s The
Paris Commune, and Alistair Horne’s The Siege of Paris are all good, and
Marx’s The Civil War in France remains spellbinding.
Part seven: The century of hope and horror
There are few satisfactory overviews of the century. The BBC television
series and book The People’s Century present most of the major events of the
century as experienced by participants, but in a somewhat haphazard manner.
Eric Hobsbawm’s The Age of Imperialism provides a useful introduction to
the forces at work at the beginning of the century, and his The Age of Extremes
provides some insights on some of the major events and cultural currents of the
century, but suffers from not really examining either the development of social
classes or the great clash between them that were so important in shaping the
century. Gabriel Kolko’s A Century of War is good at dealing with certain
episodes but is far from comprehensive. There are, however, numerous very
good books dealing with concrete developments and events.
Thomas Packenham’s The Scramble for Africa shows what imperialism
did to the peoples it conquered. Leon Trotsky’s History of the Russian
Revolution remains the best single work on the Russian Revolution, but the
abridged version of the Menshevik N N Sukhanov’s The Russian Revolution
of 1917 is good. The first two volumes of Tony Cliff’s biography of Lenin are
a good introduction to the history of the socialist movement in Russia, and the
second volume also provides an accessible outline of the events of 1917. Paul
Frölich’s Rosa Luxemburg is good biography and guide to the arguments
inside the German Social Democratic Party, while Carl Schorske’s German
Social Democracy is the best account of the party.
There is a mass of stuff in German on the revolutionary years 1918-22, but
in English the most comprehensive work remains my own The Lost
Revolution: Germany 1918-23. The book The Rise of Italian Fascism which
Angelo Tasca wrote under the name Angelo Rossi is the best on that subject but
difficult to find. Giampiero Carocci’s Italian Fascism is helpful, and can be
supplemented by J M Cammett’s Antonio Gramsci and the Origins of Italian
Communism and Paolo Spriano’s Occupation of the Factories. Donny
Gluckstein’s The Western Soviets draws together the experience of workers’
revolts in Europe in the period. Duncan Hallas’s The Comintern and Alfred
Rosmer’s Lenin’s Moscow describe the early years of the Communist
International. C L R James’s World Revolution carries the story through to the
early 1930s, and Fernando Claudin’s The Communist International provides a
full history. Victor Serge’s Memoirs of a Revolutionary is a marvellous
introduction to the movement and the period. Jean Chesneaux’s The Chinese
Labour Movement is the fullest account of its growth and defeat in the 1920s.
Harold Isaacs’s The Tragedy of the Chinese Revolution is excellent and
easier to find. The second volume of Isaac Deutscher’s biography of Trotsky,
The Prophet Unarmed, and the third volume of Tony Cliff’s Trotsky both deal,
from slightly different standpoints, with the changes in Russia in the 1920s,
while Moshe Lewin’s Lenin’s Last Struggle details Lenin’s distrust of Stalin. J
K Galbraith’s The Great Crash is a fascinating account of the crash of 1929
but unfortunately does not go into the economic crisis of the 1930s in any
depth. Charles Kindelberger’s The World in Depression concentrates mainly
on the international financial wranglings of governments. Donny Gluckstein’s
The Nazis, Capitalism and the Working Class deals with the slump’s most
disastrous political effect. France in the 1930s is covered very well in Julian
Jackson’s The Popular Front in France. G E R Gedye’s Fallen Bastions tells
the story of the Vienna rising. There are a number of very good books on the
Spanish Civil War, notably Broué and Temime’s The Revolution and the Civil
War in Spain, Ronald Fraser’s oral history Blood of Spain, Felix Morrow’s
contemporary account Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Spain, and
George Orwell’s Homage to Catalonia. The fascinating story of the US labour
movement in the 1930s is to be found in Art Preis’s Labor’s Giant Step, and
the story of one of the most important strikes is told by one its leaders in
Farrell Dobbs’s Teamster Rebellion. A J P Taylor’s The Second World War
provides a simply factual account of the war. Gabriel Kolko’s The Politics of
War looks at the manoeuvrings of the Great Powers that led to the suppression
of the resistance movement and then the Cold War. Ian Birchall’s two books,
Bailing Out the System and Workers Against the Monolith, deal with the
behaviour of the social democratic and Communist parties of the West in the
post-war period. Brian Lapping’s End of Empire (based on a television series
from the mid-1980s) is an excellent account of some of the major anti-colonial
movements in the British sphere of influence. Nigel Harris’s The Mandate of
Heaven is a critical account of the Mao period in China. Tony Cliff’s State
Capitalism in Russia (first written in 1947) looks at the real dynamic of
Stalinist society, while my own Class Struggles in Eastern Europe describes
the establishment of the Stalinist regimes in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary
and elsewhere, and the crises that beset them between 1953 and 1981. There
are now dozens of books on the black movement in the US in the 1960s.
Garrow’s Bearing the Cross tells the story of the civil rights movement
through a biography of Martin Luther King. The compilation edited by Colin
Barker, Revolutionary Rehearsals, tells the story of some of the upheavals of
the late 1960s and 1970s, while his Festival of the Oppressed is full of the
Polish workers’ movement in 1980-81. Paul Ginsborg’s A History of
Contemporary Italy and Robert Lumley’s States of Emergency both provide
accounts of the movements which swept Italy between 1969 and 1974.
Some of the best recent oral history is to be found in television
documentary footage, which can often be obtained on video. Highly
recommended are the BBC’s People’s Century, The Nazis: a Warning from
History, and the story of the black movement in the US, Eyes on the Prize; less
consistently good is The Cold War. The film The Wobblies is a documentary
look at working class militancy in the US in the first quarter of the 20th century
and Battle for Chile parts one and two a riveting look at what happened to the
Allende government.